SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/11th%20Conference/Presentations/11th_30_KaterinakisPapadopoulos_Parousiasi.pdf

The Sounds of Silence Inform Situation Awareness Concepts: Methodological and 
Terminological Aspects in Aviation Culture and the work of OMEODEK in the 
Context of Greek and English  
6th Session: Activities of organizations and bodies  for Terminology –  The Hellenic Network 
for Terminology (EDO) 
και η Ομάδα Εργασίας Ορολογίας Διαχείρισης Εναέριας Κυκλοφορίας (ΟΜΕΟΔΕΚ)  
Θεόδωρος Κατερινάκης, MSc, PhD 
Drexel On-line Learning Council, 
Drexel University, 3141 Chestnut St., Philadelphia, 
 PA 19104, USA,  
e-mail: tkaterinakis@gmail.com 
Νίκος Παπαδόπουλος, ΜΔΕ, ΠΕ2/ΕΕΚ  -ΥΠΑ  
Διευθυντής υπηρεσιών ΕΚ Περιφερειακών 
Αερολιμένων (ΥΠΑ/Δ18), Συντονιστής ΟΜΕΟΔΕΚ 
Κτίριο ΚΕΠΑΘ Κτίριο 213 - Πρώην Αμερικανική Βάση 
Ελληνικού – Τ.Κ. 16777,  
Αρ. Tηλ: +210 997 3226,  e-mail: nikosatc@yahoo.gr   
Eleto_tk_np_dz_201
3
Grounded Theory Approaches in Research 
Inquiry: Language in Aviation and 
Communication to Information Science 
2 
The book “The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research” (Glaser & 
Strauss, 1967), as a theory generator for sociological interactions 
ANSELM L. STRAUSS 
Barney Glaser 
..and continues 
systematic process of gathering and 
analyzing data  
“Grounded” Structure 
• GT steps, evaluation/critique 
• Examples…(interdisciplinary in  many ways: trust, 
leadership, marketing, HCI and CSSW) 
• Keywords to keep 
• My Application/implementation 
• The dissertation study with HCAA 
• Sources/resources 
 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
3 
Grounded Theory Paradigm (Glaser & Strauss, 1967)  
• Compatible with a qualitative research practice 
and quite important in the study of processes 
and in organizational studies particularly.  
• “Grounded,” means that it is following a strategy 
of bottom-up theory building on discourse 
issues rather, than a top-down approach 
dominant in other discourse theoretical 
perspectives (Strauss, 1998).  
• GT choices depend on what works better for the 
data and the participants of the study 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
4 
• Grounded Theory Methods (GTM) are a set of thought 
processes and procedures for qualitative data analysis that 
can help a researcher pursue a highly disciplined  
exploration of a new area, or of a domain without a 
dominant theory. The thought-processes and procedures 
are focused on the data, and always return to the data – i.e., 
the “grounding” in GTM is grounding in the data. 
• In GTM, there is no hypothesis to be tested.  
•Rather, research is guided by open-ended questions, and 
by a set of rigorous strategies that guide data collection, the 
choice of which data to sample, and the method for 
developing and testing insights into the data. The result is a 
rich, deeply interwoven description of the phenomena, 
and a set of new open-ended questions for further work. 
Grounded Theory Method in HCI and CSCW 
  
Muller, M. J. & Kogan, S. (2010). Grounded Theory Method in HCI and CSCW". IBM Watson Research in 
Cambridge. Report: 10-09. 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
5 
A GT Research Process vs a Conventional One that 
may work together 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
6 
Conventional research process (after coding or initial theory development using the 
data, a GT approach may lead to the conventional steps of a research question- 
oriented research on the left). This is a complementarity attribute of a GT approach 
that makes it applicable for diverse research “problem-oriented” methods. 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
7 
Bottom-up approach leads to “construction with theoretical sensitivity” 
Why Grounded Theory 
Personal 
Preconceptions 
Scenarios 
The research Topic: Aviation Safety  
Coding 
Deep- Interview Scenarios, Transcripts, Accident reports,  Participant 
Observation on site visits etc. 
Iterations  
for data, 
comparisons, 
coding 
Sorting/Comparing 
The process of a GT approach applied in this exploratory study 
12 
I use a GT approach with… 
 Selective parts from  the Glaser’s stream and 
the Strauss’s stream, as they evolved in: 
• coding (Charmaz, 2006; 2009; Grover et al, 
2014; Jantunen & Gause, 2014),  
• theory construction and comparisons (Corbin 
& Strauss, 1990; Glaser, 1992; Christiansen, 
2011; Kelle, 2005; Ritchie & Lewis; 2004),  
• evaluation (Wagner et al, 2010; Suddaby, 2006; 
Robson, 2002; Guba & Lincoln, 1994) and  
• iterative sorting and analysis (Muller, 2014; 
Muller & Kogan, 2010; Reichertz, 2007; Locke, 
2001). 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
9 
A GT Approach as Qualitative Research 
• Analyzes words, language, and their 
implied meanings (Miles & Huberman, 
1994). Extended empirical data are treated 
as texts with multiple meanings.  
• Data collection acquires theoretical 
significance with the selection of additional 
data (events, testimonies, visual 
productions, activities, experts, etc.) to 
exposit all properties of the developing 
conceptual categories and develop them 
further (Locke, 1996, p. 240).  
 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
10 
A GT Concept and Pattern 
Ground Theory is based in the study of a Concept 
and the identification of a pattern: 
• The concept of the study: Aviation Safety (as a 
result and) in terms of human communication 
(crew and ATC). Speech acts in the context of 
airline cockpits 
• Secondary concept: The Constraint Reality of 
time (as a type of affordances) during Flight 
Crisis 
• The pattern: Human Communicative behavior, 
choices and practices in routine flights and in 
mission critical cases.  
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
11 
Data gathering, Categorizing and Analyzing  
• personal experiences and preconceptions;  
• ethnographic field visits to airports, air bases, control 
towers and aviation authorities; 
• case studies of landmark flights;  
• interviews with aviation professionals;  
• life stories in biographical books and oral narratives;  
• artifacts, cultural texts and productions via a special 
drama series on fighter pilots;  
• observational, historical, interactional and visual texts, in 
documentaries and media interviews. 
• protocol analysis lessons to facilitate the acquisition of 
insights and 
• discourse analysis practices with close reading for the 
theory construction, sorting and comparisons. 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
12 
Keywords/Expressions in Mind for GT 
• Personal preconceptions 
• Selecting sources 
• Empirical reality 
• Coding- sorting 
• Compare-and-question 
• Dimensionalization 
• Core concepts, core category 
• Coding paradigm 
• Oral documents; historicity, materiality 
• Chief Concern of the people in the domain 
• Emergent Theoretical model 
 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
13 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
14 
Aviate, Navigate, Communicate: Silence, Voice and 
Situation Awareness in Aviation Safety 
Theodoros A. Katerinakis, Doctoral with HCAA, as of December 2014 and on   
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
15 
An Actual Cockpit  
in a flight from A to B, … 
after taxiing 
Tenerife Accident, 1977 while taxiing 
Pilot Controller Communication loop 
 
 
Shannon & Weaver typical model with Weiner's 
concepts 
The Discursive Space of a cockpit 
• Speak- act: "spoken not yet heard; heard 
not yet understood; understood not yet 
agreed; agreed not yet applied; and 
applied not yet always applied."  
• Talk and, as emerged, silence too is 
inseparable from the task, as necessary to 
develop understanding of the flight 
situation 
• Understanding goes beyond receiving and 
perceiving to situation awareness 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
17 
persons’s perception of elements in the 
environment  within a volume of time and 
space 
the comprehension of their 
meaning 
the projection of their status in the near future 
Increasing time, command span, area of interest, etc 
Transitory Awareness 
Local Awareness 
Global Awareness 
Situation Awareness Breakdown as a Concept 
(b) Actors with common  interest, the same high-level task, but different data inputs and degrees of 3 types of awareness  
(a) A single individual viewpoint – implicit in 
the original Endsley’s definition 
Situation Awareness Model in Human Factors 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
20 
Guiding Research Questions 
 
1. How do pilots and air traffic controllers talk, interact, and 
outeract with orderliness? 
 
2. How are procedural deviations and speech acts recognized? 
 
3. How is specialized language used as an algorithm? Is it a 
private language? 
 
4. How do air traffic controllers perform an orderly organization 
of conversation repair when encountering symptoms of 
miscommunication and phraseology defects? 
 
5. How do interactants negotiate affordances of time and 
language during an evolving crisis?  
 
6. What differentiates the interaction of a military flight session 
from a civil aviation one? 
Coding to Construct Theory 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
22 
Qantas. Flight Safety Magazine, compiled by Capt. A. Poulsen and Dr. G. Edkins, Issue 4, Summer 2002. 
http://www.skybrary.aero/index.php/Sterile_Flight_Deck_%28OGHFA_BN%29 
Silence is not always Golden; Voice maybe the Choice 
23 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
Two Landmark Flights 
The Shaking VIP Falcon 900 Plane 
 
The Ghost Plane Helios 522 
23 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
24 
The Effect of Erroneous Communication in Aviation 
Safety 
Errors in  
Communication 
Contradictory 
 Information 
Unreliable  
Information 
Insufficient 
Information 
Plethora but  
too much 
 information 
Non- interpretive  
information 
Erroneous  
Situation  
Awareness 
Non-desirable  
situation  
Accident 
Incident 
Controllers 
Operators and  
pilots 
ICAO/FAA Phraseology,  AirSpeak English, Plain Language,   
Paralanguage, Hesitation, Non-verbal signals, Mother tongue filter 
Tenerife Accident on 1977 
 
25 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
26 
US (Airways) 1549/United Airlines Flight 1919  Flight in …the river  
Passengers stand on the wings of the Airbus A320-214 in the Hudson 
River in New York, on January 15, 2009. 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
27 
Units of Information: Transcripts Used 
Air France Flight AF 447  
Rio de Janeiro bound for Paris, 2009 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
28 
A renowned cockpit 
designer at Boeing—
himself a transport pilot—
once said, “We don’t 
believe there are any bad 
pilots. We believe there 
are average pilots who 
have bad days.” This a 
principle that underlies 
Boeing’s cockpit designs 
A crash  which killed 
228 people 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
29 
Why Hellenic Aviation and Hellenic Air Force is important? 
Grouping of Topics from in-depth interviews 
1.
Silence: When aircrew 
members don’t speak-up and 
why? 
2.Hesitation Exists or needed? 
3.Directness in Language 
5. Standardization language Factor and mother 
tongue 
10. Redundancy and mutual verification 
11. Listening mode (Pilot- ATC) 
12. Forward Interpretation or “GetThereItis’, 
(Pilot- ATC, a,b) 
4. Professional Relationship Factor 
6. Trust and professionalism 
7. Instructor with Trainee in flight 
Mode (a,b) 
8. Communication Equipment Use 
and Priorities (a,b) 
9. Dual Instruction 
17. Oral Information 
19. Relationship and Familiarity 
 
13. Superiority and authoritative 
Mindset (Pilot Specific) 
14. Witnessability as “Building up the 
Picture” (controller’s Specific) 
15. The Two challenge rule (an 
analogy from the medical 
profession/nuclear reactor operation) 
16. Affordnaces and Skills 
18. Heuristics and Experience 
20. Air Force/Millitary Aviation 
Doctrine (Figther Pilot specific) 
 
 
Communication phenomena 
The Culture of professionalism 
Expertise, Knowledge and Decision making 
Personal factors (or beyond Human factors) 
Paralanguage  
and  
Hesitation 
Language 
with standard 
phraseology, 
checklists and 
mother 
tongue 
Category: Silence 
Category: Voice 
Situation 
awareness 
as a  
communication 
parameter  
 
The Core Concept: Aviation Safety  
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
32 
Issues Explored 
1.
One set of problems involves issues of reference, repetition, 
ambiguity, sequence breaking, and such.  
 
2.
A second set of problems concerns the implementation of 
SOPs/RoE, with the language factor.  
 
3.
Although, there are highly detailed SOPs, what counts as 
following them in a crisis situation is not always clear, and 
sometimes not to be followed at all.  
 
4.
All of these problems need to be negotiated in time-critical 
situations, with conversation interaction. 
 
5.
Also, in the process, it will be examined how inner and outer 
identities and culture are sustained in crisis conversation where 
trust is a requirement and safety non-negotiable. 
Systems Theory (in the Cockpit, Actor- Network theory, rules, team culture, a holon 
Checkland, 1981; Ostrom, 1997; Bertanlaffy, 1956; Leydesdorff ,2014; Suchman, 2006)  
 
 
 
Literature Review (…after GT introduction) 
Human Factors 
(Human actors, liveware, safety culture, just culture, crew 
resource management, situation awareness, 
multitasking inside the cockpit, the view on human errorand 
correction), accident investigation)  
Edesley, 2001; Loukopoulos et al., 2001; Dekker, 2012;2005 
Levenson, 2005 
Discourse Analysis  
With few lessons from Conversation 
Analysis  and Applied linguistics 
(conversation in critical environments, 
roles and cockpit identities, affordances of 
time and limits of language and 
awareness, reading transcripts for 
important phenomena) Nevile, 2004; 
Hutchby, 2001; Barshi, 1997, Paltridge,  
2006)_ 
 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
33 
Methods 
•
Discourse Analysis to read raw data (close reading to unpack 
meanings) 
•
In-depth interviews discussions with pilots (civil- military), 
controllers, accident investigators using selected scenarios to 
comment and re-enact events 
•
Protocol Analysis concepts to prepare the informants on talk-aloud 
conversation 
•
Participant observation (extensive) in real work and military 
operations environments 
•
Grounded theory for core categories, concepts, selection of data 
collection 
 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
34 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
Sample and with Key Informants 
35 
When Silence is not Golden (Scenario-1/4) 
• Several accidents have shown that crew members’ 
failure to speak up can have devastating consequences. 
Despite decades of crew resource management (CRM) 
training, this problem persists and still poses a risk to 
flight safety. To resolve this issue, we need to better 
understand why crew members choose silence over 
speaking up.  
• Exploring past speaking up behavior and the reasons 
for silence in 1,751 crew members from a European 
airline, who reported to have remained silent in half of 
all speaking up episodes they had experienced. Silence 
was highest for first officers and pursers, followed by 
flight attendants, and lowest for captains.  
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
36 
• This can be proven very dangerous behavior as there is 
always a possibility an indication to turn into a disaster. I 
believe that there is rather a fear among crew members 
to speak up in such cases without having in mind the 
consequences of this decision (freely speak up about the 
“problem”). 
 
• Last, I would like to mention that during emergencies 
crew members have to focus on how to navigate the 
aircraft, so they need time and peace. SILENCE is the 
magic word imposed to the Controllers who also need it 
periodically.  
 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
37 
When Silence is not Golden (ATC “Ikaros” reply-2/2) 
Voice of Choice: Hesitation (Scenario -1/2) 
Captain Reports:  
•
On takeoff roll approaching 80 knots, the Tower Controller called us and said 
in a very slow, unsure voice, “[AE 1549 …(pause).” He sounded as if he 
had something to tell us, but did not know what to say. We both noted a 
tone of concern and hesitation in his voice as if he was still unsure of 
something at that moment. We were light weight and had 13,000 feet of 
runway ahead of us. We had to make an immediate decision. 
Captain Acts 
•
I elected to initiate rejected takeoff procedures. During deceleration the 
Tower Controller said, “Disregard.”I would take the same action again. 
 
The First Officer’s report on the same incident 
 
•
 
In the few seconds before Tower finished his thought, we were left to 
guess what the call was about. We were still relatively slow speed on the 
roll, so the Captain did what was prudent and safe by rejecting. 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
38 
 
• We are trained to keep a calm, strict and precise tone 
of voice to transmit a sense of safety to the aircraft.  
• We are supposed to be “the ears and eyes of the pilot 
on the ground” and our job is to provide them with 
such information and clearances that are absolutely 
safe for their cruise. I am of the opinion, and that is 
something rather common, that even a wrong 
clearance or instruction should be transferred to the 
pilot with preciseness, calmness and certainty.  
• Afterwards, the ATC may correct his/her previous 
clearance without putting any additional pressure to the 
pilot due to his unsure tone of voice.  
 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
39 
Voice of Choice: Hesitation (ATC “Santorinis” reply- 2/3) 
 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
40 
Voice of Choice: Hesitation (ATC “Ikaros” reply- 3/3) 
• The take-off is a very critical phase for the flight safety. I 
experienced such cases some times in my career but not 
harmful ones. The hesitation in this example is rather due to 
lack of situational awareness of the controller. The pilot did 
the right thing in order to safeguard the aircraft.  
 
• Controller’s stabilized voice can be proven helpful but this 
is not easy all the time, due to the human nature and the 
stress occurring in such dangerous situations. As all 
communications between pilots and controllers are recorded 
there is an additional fear for not being compliant with the 
standards phraseologies or the rules, thus imposing more 
stress (voice uncertainty, low voice, fear, sweating, hand 
trembling, heart bit etc). 
 
Summary of Findings 
• Silence is an interactional element with substantial 
contribution both to completed flights and aviation 
accidents 
• Hesitation is an early symptom and action when situation 
awareness lacks  
• Tacit knowledge of pilots, controllers, and accident 
investigators is a necessary addition to SOPs and RoE 
• The aviation sub-cultures contains several distinct micro-
cultures which affect professional responsibility, 
uncertainty avoidance response, and decision-making in 
micro-environments 
• Local rationality is a condition to evaluate communicative 
behaviors 
• Human Errors should be acknowledged, talked and 
repaired with transparent communication 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
41 
What is important in Communication/Information Science 
• Situation awareness seems to be an enriching addition in 
communication models 
• Redundancy can be a message amplifier in several 
communication contexts 
• Non-verbal communication in institutional settings and 
mediated environments is instrumental (produces 
operational speech acts) 
• Human error repair (not excuse) evolves as a systemic 
feedback in communication for mission critical 
environments 
• Safety culture and just culture demand continuous intra-
institutional communication (not only outreach) 
• Deontological inquiries and moral judgments should 
always be part of message evaluation in communication 
models 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
42 
  
.  
 46 airports in an  
Area size of : 131,957 km2  -  
Coastline: 15,000 Km-  
Population: 10,815,197 people   
.  
 
Infrastructure in Greece and  
Partnerships already formed 
Imia crisis 1996-97 
My NSA  Souda office inCrete 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
44 
•The Grounded Theory Review is an interdisciplinary, online 
academic journal for the advancement of classic grounded theory 
and scholarship. The Grounded Theory Review adheres to the 
highest standards of peer review and engages established and 
emerging scholars from anywhere in the world.  While centered in 
social sciences and the health care fields, The Grounded Theory 
Review is an interdisciplinary, online academic journal for the 
advancement of classic grounded theory and scholarship.  
 
•The Grounded Theory Review adheres to the highest standards 
of peer review and engages established and emerging scholars 
from anywhere in the world.  While centered in social sciences 
and the health disciplines, the Grounded Theory Review is open 
and welcoming to contributions from any academic field. 
http://groundedtheoryreview.com/ 
Two Applied Cases to Combine 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
45 
Barney G. Glaser is the founder of the Grounded 
Theory Institute in Mill Valley, California, and has also 
been a research sociologist at the University of 
California Medical Center, San Francisco. He is the 
author or coauthor of several books, including The 
Grounded Theory Perspective II and Experts versus 
Laymen: A Study of the Patsy and the Subcontractor, 
published by Aldine Transaction. Anselm L. Strauss 
(1916-1996) was emeritus professor of sociology at 
the University of California, San Francisco. He was the 
author of numerous books, including Professions, 
Work and Careers, Mirrors and Masks: The Search for 
Identity, and Creating Sociological Awareness: 
Collective Images and Symbolic Representations, all 
published in new editions by Transaction.  
Christakis Fowler to connect from ex-patients with 
expected “date of death”, but surviving through 
their social network 
Glaserian GT Resource http://www.groundedtheory.com/ 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
46 
A Final Word 
•
“A great advantage of the grounded theory approach is the 
fact that grounded theories are solution-oriented rather 
than problem-focused. I believe this solution-seeking 
speaks convincingly to a main concern of contemporary 
society, in which new forms of digital communication 
constantly change the ways that individuals and large groups 
of people relate to each other.  
•
Even if most of us are increasingly computerized in 
thinking and doing, our apparently rational clear cut goals 
are still coupled with values, affections, and traditions, as 
once pointed out by the influential sociologist Max Weber. 
Grounded theories are outstandingly good at 
conceptualizing main concerns of the few on behalf of the 
many, therein lies their explanatory strength and firm support  
 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
47 
 
From the editorial of GT Review at  http://groundedtheoryreview.com/2014/12/19/the-strength-of-a-solution-seeking-approach-editorial/of productive change”.  
Brian Robert Webb (2001). Action in Context - Context in Action:Towards a 
Grounded Theory of Software Design, PhD Thesis, Deptof Computer Science, 
University College London, Gower Street, London, WC IE 6BT 
 (John Dewey, Art as Experience, 1934, p. 5 1, quoted in Strauss and Corbin, 
1990, p. 258) 
• “[In GT] It is no linguistic accident that "building", 
"construction", "work", designate both a process and its 
finished product. Without the meaning of the verb that 
of the noun remains blank“. 
 
• To this we may add "design“. 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
48 
GT Epistemology 
T. Katerinakis, Drexel University 
49 
49 
The Sounds of Silence Inform Situation Awareness Concepts: 
Methodological and Terminological Aspects in Aviation 
Culture and the work of OMEODEK in the Context of Greek 
and English  
Θεόδωρος Κατερινάκης, MSc, PhD,  e-mail: tkaterinakis@gmail.com                              
Νίκος Παπαδόπουλος, ΜΔΕ, ΠΕ2/ΕΕΚ  -ΥΠΑ, e-mail: nikosatc@yahoo.gr   
 
   
 
 
 
Thank you 
Questions and comments are welcomed… 
