SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/ELETO-EAFT_Conference_2013-11-07/ELETO-EAFT-Symposium-2013_Jan%20Roukens_Paper_EN.pdf

EAFT–ELETO Symposium 
“National Languages and Terminology  
in Higher Education, Science & Technology” 
Athens, Greece, 7 November 2013 
State-of-affairs Round Table 
 
‘Europe and the Low Countries’ 
Background for the presentation of Jan Roukens 
 
This ‘summary’ provides some background for the presentation. It comprises essentially three 
citations from recent publications (September 2013), and comments by the author, from: 
- a report by the Institute of International Education (IIE) 
- a paper of A. Kornai  
- a letter to a Dutch language advisory body (English translation).  
Citations from the report: English-taught Master's programmes in Europe, a 2013 update 
“The paper, English-Taught Master’s Programs in Europe: A 2013 Update, is an update of a 
report published by IIE in June 2011, and provides a data-driven look at the continued growth 
of master’s programs in Europe taught entirely or partially in English.”  
“In recent years, European countries in which English is not the primary language of 
instruction have developed an increasing number of programs taught either fully or partly in 
English in order to serve domestic demand for higher education in English and to attract 
students from around the world. The authors, Megan Brenn-White and Elias Faethe, examine 
statistics that they have obtained from MastersPortal.eu, an online directory and 
comprehensive source of information about postgraduate degree programs in Europe. The 
authors examine the growth of English-taught master’s programs in Europe, including the 
total number of programs offered by country and academic discipline, their duration, and data 
on prospective students.” 
“According to the report, as of June 2013 the total number of English-taught programs in 
Europe was 6,609, a 42 percent increase since 2011. The top host countries for English-taught 
Master's programs are: Netherlands, Germany, Sweden,”  
Comment 
IIE is an organisation in the US promoting international education worldwide. The 
organisation compiles data about student mobility and English-taught university programmes 
worldwide. In Europe, in-depth studies of the kind have been conducted by the ACA – 
Academic Cooperation Association in 2002 and 2007. It was expected that a 3rd ACA study 
covering the situation in 2012 would be published in 2013, but it was not possible to fund that 
survey. Very recently the European Commission has been able to fund the follow-up survey. 
That is positive, because the ACA reports are of good quality and provide figures and 
motives. 
The numbers of English-Taught Programmes (ETPs) in European universities vary from 
country to country and from university to university. Trendsetter and leader of the gang are 
the Netherlands since 2002. But the Scandinavian countries have surpassed the Netherlands in 
relative terms, i.e. in proportion to the size of their populations. In the Netherlands all the 
Dutch-taught masters have been abandoned, and many bachelor studies are also offered 
English-only. The Nordic countries are next in line. And the process is goes on. Large 
countries like Germany, France and Italy follow at a considerable distance, though steadily. 
The consequences of these developments for society and for the quality of knowledge transfer 
and for education in general, have never been studied in some depth in these countries. 
Politicians were looking in the other direction. In an increasing number of countries, scientific 
literature in the national language is non-existent. Handbooks, even textbooks in the national 
languages are not produced any more in several countries. The university staffs potentially 
able to write such books are not available. If only because the development of scientific 
terminology is 10-20 years behind.  
Citations of the article of A. Kornai: On Digital Language Deathi 
“A language may not be completely dead until the death of its last speaker, but there are three 
clear signs of imminent death observable well in advance. First, there is loss of function, seen 
whenever other languages take over entire functional areas such as commerce. Next, there is 
loss of prestige, especially clearly reflected in the attitudes of the younger generation. Finally, 
there is loss of competence, manifested by the emergence of ‘semi-speakers’ who still 
understand the older generation, but adopt a drastically simplified (reanalysed) version of the 
grammar.” 
“In the digital age, these signs of incipient language death take on the following 
characteristics. Loss of function performed digitally increasingly touches every functional 
area from day to day communication (texting, email) to commerce, official business, and so 
on. Loss of prestige is clearly seen in the adage if it’s not on the web, it does not exist, and 
loss of competence boils down to the ability of raising digital natives in your own language. 
Digital ascent is the opposite process, whereby a language increasingly acquires digital 
functions and prestige as its speakers increasingly acquire digital skills.” 
Comment 
Kornai identifies three endogenous factors leading to the imminent death of a language. They 
resemble the symptoms of a disease. There are exogenous factors as well, but these are less 
interesting in this context. Although....Examples of exogenous factors, or forces: natural 
catastrophes, war and suppression, political pressure, economic pressure. Kornai describes the 
prolonged phase of decline of a language, not just the terminal phase. During the phase of 
decline, a language gradually looses functionality and quality. This goes hand in hand with 
reduced usage of the language; overall throughout society or in particular domains, such as 
the science and technology domains. 
 
A section of his paper deals with the decline of a language due to insufficient usage in the 
digital environment. This is a very relevant perspective in modern society, because of the ever 
increasing impact of the digital environment on the human cognitive habitat. Many scholars 
share the view that if a language does not survive in the information society, it will not 
survive tout court. Although the relative volume of images on the internet has increased in 
comparison with text, text is still the most important medium for transferring knowledge in 
science and education. In the last century the European Commission recognised this and 
counteracted the overwhelming use of English in IT and the internet by launching the concept 
of a multilingual information society.  
 
Citation, from a letter of the stichting Nederlandsii to the president of the Council for Dutch 
Language and Literature (original: Dutch)iii 
“With a sense of relief we learned of the intention of the Council for Dutch Language and 
Literature, to look into the use of teaching languages in higher education institutions and to 
report its findings. Since its foundation, 15 years ago, the stichting Nederlands has actively 
promoted Dutch as a cultural language, and therefore resisted the impoverishment of Dutch 
under the pressure of other languages, English in particular. We believe that your proposal to 
assess the use of the language in higher education is linked with of a similar desire to let 
Dutch fully play its important role and to safeguard the language against serious threats. A 
laureate of the LOF prizeiv of the stichting Nederlands, the comedian Herman Finkers, 
mentioned in his acceptance speech in 2012 that the ongoing mutilation of the language ‘takes 
the soul out of the language’. Despite the poetic overexposure a rake characterisation.” 
 
“In the past decade, several LOF prizes were awarded to individuals and institutions in higher 
education who resisted the pressure. Particularly in the universities the teaching language 
changed drastically. For the worse, from the perspective of this foundation. One of the 
laureates of the LOF prize was the Dutch Academy of Sciences. In 2003 the Academy 
published the report “Dutch, unless .... “, i.e. the teaching language in the humanities should 
remain Dutch, unless on occasions the choice for another language was inevitablev. Despite 
the wide acceptance of the recommendations by scholars in the humanities, the report was not 
acted upon. A sign on the wall.” 
 
“In 2008, the stichting Nederlands, in collaboration with other organisations in the cultural 
and scientific sectors organised the congress: Dutch in higher education and sciencevi. The 
report of this congress was issued by the Gent publisher Academia Press. The Netherlands, 
more than Flanders, is the leader in Europe with respect to Anglicisation of higher education. 
But that same trend is noticeable in other countries, especially in the Northern- or Germanic-
speaking European countries.” 
 
“Language policy in higher education has triggered an initiative to raise awareness of the 
appalling decline of the national language in higher education and science in an ever 
increasing number of European countries. In Slovenia (2010) and Estonia (2011) events such 
as the conference held in Brussels (2008) were organised. In November 2013, the prow is 
turned to Greece. These efforts are minuscule, compared with the forces and inexhaustible 
resources that are available to universities and other organisations supported by multinational 
business. They promote and drive the ongoing anglicisation of science and university 
education.  
The stichting Nederlands together with equally motivated people and organisations 
throughout Europe keep the fire burning for the most valuable common heritage, the living 
language diversity of Europe.” 
Comment 
These are citations from a letter addressed to an official Dutch language advisory board on 
behalf of the stichting Nederlands. After almost two decades of total neglect by the authorities 
of the declining use of Dutch as the teaching language in higher education institutions in the 
Netherlands and Flandersvii, a glimpse of a change of attitude is emerging over the horizon. 
Pretty late, too late probably, as the language is not used any more in scientific writing and 
has not been enriched by new scientific terminology in the latest decades. Oral Dutch is still 
used in the first (bachelor) cycle in some university programmes, but declining. Dutch master 
programmes are virtually non-existent. With some exceptions, all textbooks and handbooks 
are in English, imported from America and the UK.  
 
Is Dutch scientific language dead? It is stripped of its capability to support modern science 
and thus may be declared dead. The use of scientific Dutch is discouraged by the political and 
university authorities, and often forbidden by the universities in accordance with internal 
regulations. In spite of the fact that the law on Higher Education in the Netherlands states 
explicitly that the instruction language is Dutch. 
 
But a language differs from a human being: a language may be reanimated if human beings 
can be found having the vision and the energy to do so. At this moment, the political weight 
of the good guys is too small. But never say never.  
 
Jan Roukens 
                                                           
i   Kornai, A. (2013) Digital Language Death. PLoS ONE 8(10): e77056. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0077056 
ii  Civil society foundation promoting the Dutch language 
iii  Roukens, Jan (2013) Brief aan de Voorzitter van de Raad voor de Nederlandse Taal en Letteren; Brussels, 
September 2013 
iv  Prize awarded every year by the stichting Nederlands to an individual or a group for an extraordinary 
achievement promoting the Dutch language (LOF = PRAISE) 
v  For example a temporary guest teacher not able to speak Dutch as teaching language 
vi  Nederlands in hoger onderwijs en wetenschap? Conference proceedings:  Academia Press, Gent, 2008 
vii The attitudes towards their common Dutch language differ considerably in the two countries, after their 
separation by force and politics in 1585. In a few words: the Flemish struggled for their language against 
foreign rulers for almost 400 years, whereas the Netherlands gained independence and flourished. In 
Flanders, the fire is still glowing 
