SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/12th%20Conference/Papers-and-speakers/12th_24-14-17_VoyevutkoNatalya-FedorovaYuliya_Paper2_V05.pdf

ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
333 
 
24    Anti-discrimination examination of textbooks:  
problems of terminology 
  
Natalya Voyevutko, Yuliya Fedorova  
ABSTRACT 
The international community constantly monitors the events related to ensuring equal rights and 
opportunities.  In this regard, the issue of gender prevails in various social spheres. It means a 
hierarchy, stratification and power built into gender relations. The development of a gender theory 
inevitably led to relevant research in the field of education, which demonstrated that the content of 
textbooks and curricula was mainly gender-labeled. The modern school should reflect the diversity of 
life. Therefore, the educational content is highlighted with the emergence of a gender perspective and 
further anti-discrimination analysis of textbooks and curricula. Focusing on scientific and methodological 
works devoted to the anti-discriminatory analysis of educational content published in the Modern Greek, 
Russian and Ukrainian languages, this paper considers related concepts and terms used by the system 
of education of the states with the abovementioned official languages. The analysis of the anti-
discrimination expertise terminology in the Modern Greek, Russian and Ukrainian languages are based 
on such methods as qualitative and quantitative analyses of the given content in terms of the legislative 
and scientific-methodological bases. Thus, while analyzing the anti-discrimination aspect of the 
educational Ukrainian textbooks, we observe a problem when the same phenomena have different 
nominations in the considered languages, and similar terms have different definitions of content. 
 
Εξέταση των σχολικών βιβλίων κατά των διακρίσεων:  
προβλήματα ορολογίας 
Наталя Воєвутко, Юлія Федорова 
ΠΕΡΙΛΗΨΗ 
Μια εξέταση κατά των διακρίσεων ορίζεται ως η ανάλυση οποιουδήποτε περιεχομένου, τα 
αποτελέσματα της οποίας παρέχουν μια γνώμη σχετικά με την τήρηση της αρχής της μη διάκρισης, που 
προβλέπει την απαγόρευση κάθε είδους διακρίσεων συμπεριλαμβανομένων φύλου, φυλής, χρώματος, 
εθνοτικής ή κοινωνικής προέλευσης, γενετικών χαρακτηριστικών, γλώσσας, θρησκείας ή πεποιθήσεων, 
πολιτικών ή άλλων απόψεων, εθνικής μειονότητας, καθεστώτων ιδιοκτησίας, προέλευσης, αναπηρίας, 
ηλικίας ή γενετήσιου προσανατολισμού. Με τον όρο "εξέταση του εκπαιδευτικού περιεχομένου για την 
καταπολέμηση των διακρίσεων" εννοείται το σύστημα των ειδικών ονομάτων, το οποίο έχει τη δική του 
οργάνωση σε λογικό και γλωσσικό επίπεδο και εκφράζει ένα σύστημα εννοιών στη διασταύρωση 
τέτοιων επιστημών όπως η νομολογία, η κοινωνιολογία και η παιδαγωγική. Ο όρος αυτός στην 
νεοελληνική, ουκρανική και ρωσική γλώσσα δημιουργήθηκε υπό την επίδραση της αγγλικής ως 
γλώσσας παραγωγού και υπό την επίδραση των εθνικών παραδόσεων της δημιουργίας όρων.  
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
334 
Ένα από τα προβλήματα της ορολογίας της ανάλυσης των σχολικών βιβλίων κατά των διακρίσεων είναι 
ονοματολογικό όταν η έννοια του όρου είναι άνισα κατανοητή στις εθνικές γλώσσες, όπως για 
παράδειγμα συνέβη με μια ομάδα όρων για τη χρήση σημάτων που προστατεύονται από το νόμο και 
απαγορεύει τις διακρίσεις. Αποδείχθηκε ότι ο κατάλογος αυτών των χαρακτηριστικών σε διαφορετικά 
κράτη στο επίπεδο της εθνικής νομοθεσίας είναι διαφορετικός.Αυτό εξαρτάται από τις ιδιαιτερότητες των 
εθνικών αναγκών κάθε κοινωνίας.Αυτό επηρεάζει την κατανόηση της ουσίας της έννοιας της «εξέτασης 
των σχολικών βιβλίων κατά των διακρίσεων», διότι εάν η διεθνής συνιστώσα του περιεχομένου του 
όρου μπορεί να ερμηνευθεί ως παγκόσμια (είναι κατανοητή με μοναδικό τρόπο σε όλες τις γλώσσες), η 
εθνική συνιστώσα του όρου προσθέτει πρόσθετους ορισμούς (ειδικά για τις υπό συζήτηση γλώσσες). 
Το επόμενο είναι το πρόβλημα της εκφραστικής ουδετερότητας του όρου, που με τη σύγχρονη έννοια 
θεωρείται ως απαραίτητο μέσο για να επηρεάσει τον αποδέκτη της πληροφορίας, ως ένα περίπλοκο 
γλωσσικό φαινόμενο, του οποίου ο σκοπός είναι να εκφράσει την ομιλία.Η εκφραστικότητα υπάρχει σε 
αυτούς τους όρους, οι οποίοι είναι ικανοί να μεταδώσουν τη στάση του ομιλητή στην έκφρασή 
του.Ωστόσο, παρά το γεγονός ότι στη συντριπτική πλειοψηφία τους οι όροι είναι εκφραστικά ουδέτεροι, 
είναι πιο σωστό να μην μιλάμε για την εκφραστικότητα ενός όρου ή μιας έκφρασης, αλλά μάλλον για την 
ένταση ορισμένων σημασιολογικών συνιστωσών.Οι λόγοι της μπορεί να είναι μια προσπάθεια να δοθεί 
έμφαση στον ελιτίστικο ομιλητή ή μια προσπάθεια να κρύψουν τις προθέσεις τους. Παραγωγικό για 
έρευνα στα νεοελληνικά, ουκρανικά και ρωσικά συστήματα ορολογίας κατά των διακρίσεων είναι το 
φαινόμενο της συνωνυμίας των όρων.Ο λόγος για την εμφάνισή του είναι το γεγονός ότι ο γλωσσικός 
παραγωγός γι 'αυτούς ήταν τα αγγλικά, γεγονός το οποίο οδήγησε σε σημαντικό αριθμό όρων προς στις 
γλώσσες-αποδέκτες. Αυτές οι λέξεις / φράσεις μεταφράστηκαν σε μητρικές γλώσσες, με αποτέλεσμα την 
ταυτόχρονη λειτουργία συνώνυμων όρων διεθνούς και εθνικής προέλευσης. Το πρόβλημα της 
παράλληλης λειτουργίας των συνώνυμων όρων τα συστήματα ορολογίας τοέλυσαν με τους δικούς τους 
τρόπους:η διάκριση ανάλογα με τα πεδία χρήσης, η αλλαγή των ορισμών των όρων με την επέκταση / 
μείωση του όγκου, την αναδιανομή, την εξειδίκευση της λεξικής αξίας. 
 
 
 
 
 
1   Anti-discriminatory examination of educational content 
While analyzing anti-discrimination motifs of educational textbooks it is evident that there are 
many differences in the national terminology used in the abovementioned national 
languages.  Of course, most of the terms are similar, since they are international legal acts 
and English are the international language. However, the implementation of the international 
legal imperative in the national dimension occurred with respect to the state strategies of 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
335 
terminology formation. This feature influences the formation of national terminology systems. 
Further analysis of terminology used is made in anti-discrimination paradigm on the example 
of the Ukrainian, Russian, Greek, and Cyprian educational spaces. 
The purpose of this research is to investigate the issue of terms and concepts conformity, 
which relate to anti-discrimination examination of school textbooks in Ukrainian, Russian 
and Modern Greek languages. 
The formation of anti-discrimination expertise of educational content took place in gender 
theory terms and in the field of legislation and lawmaking. Thus, the content of curricula and 
textbooks is not gender-sensitive, but rather gender-labeled.  The educational content 
supposedly reflects the diversity of life, specific of gender, and highlights certain features of 
educational content analysis [7: 462]. 
Gender expertise is an analysis based on gender methodology. This approach does not  
simply describes the difference in status, roles and other aspects of men and women’ lives, 
but also analyzes power and dominance established in society through gender roles and 
relationships [9]. This method is an assessment of institutionalizing gender equality 
effectiveness in policies, programs, structures of organizations and processes (including 
decision-making procedures) and related budgets [3].  
The purpose of textbooks gender analysis is to identify the proposed social roles, the 
specific qualities of men and women with narrated to pupils in the textbooks and the 
specifics of the translation of these images in textbooks in various subjects and at different 
educational levels [20: 7]. For example, the Moscow Center for Gender Studies 
(http://www.gender.ru/) developed the following criteria for gender analysis of textbooks for 
higher education: appeal to the values of equal gender relations, gender differences, gender 
discrimination issues; the gender context of textbook content and teaching aids in pedagogy 
(positive, sexist); availability of textbooks and textbooks on pedagogy of gender terminology;  
reference to samples of male and female behavior in textbooks and teaching aids in 
pedagogy; representation of gender stereotypes;  the use of gender symbols in the 
illustrations;  terminological marking of the text by the nouns of the masculine, feminine, or 
neutral genders [16: 10]. 
Analyzing educational textbooks in Cypriot educational space in non-discrimination 
perspective, researchers ∆. Κογκίδου and Μ. Γκασούκα distinguish non-sexist (μη-σεξιστικό 
εκπαιδευτικό υλικό) educational material and anti-sexist (αντι-σεξιστικό εκπαιδευτικό υλικό) 
educational material. They differentiate these concepts, emphasizing that non-sexist 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
336 
education is a teaching material that does not include traditional stereotypical gender 
segregation and changes in the role of men and women. Non-sexist approach (µη-σεξιστική 
προσέγγιση) reflects equitable gender models, preserving the traditional and non-traditional 
roles of men and women, that is, represents a neutral representation of gender stereotypes. 
Antisexist is an educational material does not contain elements of sexism and gender 
discrimination, but also provides alternative considerations represented in the roles of men 
and women that realistically reflect reality; analyzes the advantages of alternative 
considerations and the difficulties of their implementation, including institutional barriers and 
discrimination. Antisexist educational material encourages students to criticize and take 
measures to eliminate sexism and gender asymmetries [2: 22]. 
But in today's society, the gender dimension gradually changes into non-discriminatory, 
based on the idea that equality is the goal to be achieved in the decision-making process. In 
order for the goal to become a reality, the influence of decisions on all groups that have 
traditionally been discriminated should be taken into account [1: 5]. 
O. Malakhova, O. Marushchenko, T. Drozhzhyna, Y. Salakhova, V. Selivanenko, in the 
Ukrainian educational space, defining theoretical and methodological principles of anti-
discrimination examination of textbooks, focus on the following most widespread 
discriminatory practices: quantitative disproportion of both sexes representation (in terms of 
age, color, ethnicity, religion, disability, etc.); representation of individuals in stereotyped 
social roles (e.g. sex, age, ethnicity, religion, etc); segregation and polarization by gender;  
image rights and general human values only through the image of an individual, ethnic 
Ukrainian, Orthodox without any physical limitations;  use of gender-sensitive language [17: 
30]. 
In Ukraine, the Ministry of Education and Science (Order of October 31, 2018) imposes such 
anti-discriminatory 
requirements 
on 
the 
content 
of 
textbooks:  
1) proportional representation of persons for the maximum possible number of protected 
features — in a variety of possible range of characters/actors of different age, gender, place 
of residence and  etc.; 2) the representation of characters/actors mainly in non-stereotypical 
social roles; 3) lack of segregation and polarization according to protected features; 4) the 
image of a person as a whole and universal value through various images; 5) the use of a 
non-discriminatory language (collective nouns, descriptive constructions, parallel forms of 
masculine and feminine [13]. 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
337 
It is also important to focus on multiculturalism representation in textbooks related to anti-
discrimination requirements, such as the availability of tasks, exercises, comments, 
illustrations (tolerant attitude towards representatives of different nations, national and ethnic 
groups, cultures, traditions and beliefs, the ability for inter-ethnic and inter-confessional 
dialogue), the ability to identify and respect different points of view, understanding the needs 
and capabilities of other people. The textbooks also cannot transfer information that distorts 
the content of human rights or gives a false idea of them [12]. 
In the Republic of Cyprus, the Coordinating Council on Intercultural Education and Gender 
Relations of the Ministry of Education and Culture, focuses on the fact that textbooks are 
created on the basis of educational programs and the results of the studies identifying six 
criteria for anti-discrimination expertise of educational programs: didactic and pedagogical 
feasibility, content, language, structure - organization, aesthetics, illustrative material. These 
principles facilitate analysis of gender equality education programs content and reduce 
inequality in two aspects, both culture, and gender [8: 46]. 
In the Russian Federation, the Ministry of Education and Science does not provide any anti-
discrimination analysis of textbooks. Nevertheless, scientific, pedagogical, social, 
ethnocultural and regional textbook reviews are relevant and they reflect the principle of 
non-discrimination to a certain extent. The researchers from Russia mainly focus on the 
following issues: the formation of patriotism, love and respect for the family, the Motherland, 
their people, the region etc. All these aspects are correlated with analysis of a tolerant 
attitude towards the representatives of different religious, ethnic and cultural groups, 
specifics of interethnic and interdenominational dialogue; reflection of basic national values 
of Russia, regional and ethno-cultural features of the subject, diversity, the unity of national 
cultures and peoples in terms of the society’s multicultural aspect [18]. 
Thus, while analyzing the anti-discrimination aspect of the educational Ukrainian textbooks, 
we observe a problem when the same phenomena have different nominations in the 
considered languages, and similar terms have different definitions of content. 
2   Onomasiological problem 
The term "anti-discrimination expertise of educational content" is a system of special terms 
that has its own organization both at logical and linguistic levels and expresses a system of 
concepts at the junction of such sciences as jurisprudence, sociology and pedagogy. 
Observations on the functioning of this terminology system in the Ukrainian, Russian, Greek 
and Cyprian educational spaces make it possible to state that in most cases the terms and 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
338 
concepts on the designation of the examination (including textbooks) on the basis of non-
discrimination appeared for the first time in the English, and therefore in the analysis 
languages are included as direct borrowings from English with the help of an adequate 
translation of the content within the limits of the tendency to use the generally accepted 
international terminology. Their adaptation into national languages took place under the 
influence of national traditions of term creation. 
By exploring the process of naming special concepts, one can notice that in all the 
languages analyzed a group of terms has been formed to denote the features protected by 
law, which prohibits discrimination. However, the very list of these features in different states 
at the level of national legislation is different. This indicates a different understanding of the 
meaning of the term "signs of discrimination". 
For example, the Racial Equality Directive (2009) requires EU Member States to prohibit 
discrimination on grounds of racial or ethnic origin in employment, social protection, 
including social security, health care, education, and the provision and / or access to goods 
and services, including housing.  In addition, the Directive requires the extension of the 
prohibition on discrimination in employment on the basis of religion or belief, disability, age 
and sexual orientation [6]. 
In Ukraine, this list is regulated by the Law "On Principles of Prevention and Counteraction 
of Discrimination in Ukraine (2014)". The following features are: race, color, political, 
religious or other beliefs, gender, age, disability, ethnic or social origin, citizenship, family 
and property status, place of residence, language or other characteristics [19]. 
In Greece, the following features are protected from discrimination: racial or ethnic origin, 
descent, color, religious or other beliefs, disability or chronic disease, age, family or social 
status, sexual orientation and gender identity, or any other characteristics. 
In the Republic of Cyprus, the range of protected features is wider. In addition to those 
defined in Greece, discrimination in Cyprus is prohibited on grounds such as community, 
language, special needs, gender, political or other beliefs, national or social origin, birth, 
wealth or any other sign [6: 12]. 
Discrimination in the Russian Federation is prohibited by gender, race, color, nationality, 
language, origin, property, family, social status and position, age, place of residence, 
attitude to religion, belief, membership or ineligibility for public associations,  which social 
groups [15]. 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
339 
Consequently, common to all four laws are protection on the basis of race and ethnic origin, 
color of skin, religious beliefs, gender, age, disability, social status, family, property status, 
language, sexual orientation. This list refers to international characteristics. 
Instead, in each of the studied countries, legislative acts set forth some features that reflect 
national specifics. For example, the "community", "special needs" (Cyprus), "gender identity" 
(Greece), "political convictions" (Ukraine, Cyprus), "place of residence" (Ukraine, Russia), 
"citizenship" (Ukraine). 
In addition, the national specificity can be extended expansion of definitions of certain terms. 
Thus, in Russia, in addition to "ethnic origin", "nationality" is defined, not "religious 
convictions", but "attitude towards religion". In Greece, not only "disability" is defined, but 
"disability and chronic illness". In Ukraine, not a "social status", but a "social origin".  
As we see, the definition of the meaning of the term "signs of discrimination" in the analyzed 
languages is different in the percentage of the international and national. We associate this 
with the peculiarities of the national needs of each society. It influences the understanding of 
the essence of the concept of "anti-discrimination examination of the textbook", because if 
the international component of the content of the term can be interpreted as a global one (it 
is uniquely understood in all languages), the national component of the term adds additional 
definitions (specific to the languages under discussion). 
3   The problem of expressive neutrality 
The concept of the expressiveness of the term in modern linguistics is controversial. The 
expressiveness of terms is currently regarded as the necessary means of influencing the 
recipient of information; as a complex linguistic phenomenon whose aim is to make speech 
more emphatic. Expressiveness is found in the terms able to convey the attitude of the 
speaker to his statement [14: 93-94]. Comparison of the terminological systems under study 
indicates that each of them to a certain extent is characterized by the expressiveness of 
terminology. 
For example, in Ukrainian anti-discriminatory examination of educational content the 
following terms are used: ворожий сексизм (hostile sexism), доброзичливий сексизм 
(benevolent sexism), токсична маскулінність (toxic masculinity), «чорний» фемінізм  
("black" feminism) [21]. The Greek scholar Vasilis Pandazes claims that racist "racial" 
models are deeply rooted and transmitted from generation to generation in modern Greek 
through the legislative, social structure and education. Therefore, typical expressions are 
"μαύρο χρήμα" (black/dirty money), "μαύρη εργασία" (dirty work), "κάποιν να μαυρίσω" 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
340 
(blacken someone/ throw dirt at somebody) etc. [4]. Similarly, in Russian anti-discrimination 
terminology the following expressions occur: позитивная дискриминация (positive 
discrimination), «спутниковые» национальные счета ("satellite" national accounts), 
теремное затворничество (tower seclusion, derived from Russian (tower-)room), 
стигма «инвалидной» сексуальности (stigma of "invalid" sexuality) [11]. 
However, despite the fact that the vast majority of terms are expressively neutral, it is more 
correctly to speak not about the expressiveness of a term or expression, but rather about the 
intensity of some semantic components. It may be caused by the attempts to emphasize the 
elitism of the speaker or to hide one’s intentions [10: 13]. For example, in the dictionary of 
scientific terms in the study "Anti-racist Education" (2015), V. Pandazes gives the equivalent 
translation of the term προκατάληψη as prejudice (preconceived opinion, superstition). On 
the other hand, the terminological word-combination φυλετικές προκαταλήψεις (racial bias) is 
translated as racial discriminations (racism, race discrimination), that is, "prejudice" is 
treated as "discrimination" [4: 10]. Thus, in this context, the speaker’s attitude towards his 
statement is expressed, the intensification of the term takes place, which illustrates its 
communicative and pragmatic functioning and indicates the expressive marking of the 
interpretation. 
4   The problem of synonymy of the term 
Productive for research in the Modern Greek, Ukrainian and Russian anti-discrimination 
terminology systems is the phenomenon of synonymy of terms. The reason for its 
appearance is the fact that the language-producer for them was English, which resulted in a 
significant amount of terminology vocabulary to recipients of terminology systems. These 
words / phrases were translated into native languages, which led to the simultaneous 
functioning of synonymous terms of international and national origin. For example, 
gender/κοινωνικό φύλο (gr.), ґендер/соціальна стать, гендер/социальный пол (rus.); 
гендерний підхід/статтєво-рольовий підхід (ukr.), гендерный подход/полоролевой 
подход (rus). Also, the problem of synonymy of terms is closely related to the phenomenon 
of intramural synonymy, for example, έμφυλη ανάλυση - ανάλυση ως προς το φύλο (gr.), 
ознаки дискримінації - дискримінаційні ознаки - захищені ознаки (ukr.) etc. 
The problem of parallel functioning of synonymous terms studied terminology systems were 
solved by their own methods: 1) the delineation of the fields of use, for example, 
romaphobia/τσιγανοφοβία 
(gr.), 
реверсивний 
ейджизм/зворотний 
ейджизм, 
інвалід/людина з інвалідністю (ukr.); 2) change of definitions of terms by expanding or 
narrowing the volume, redistribution, specification of lexical value: андоцентрична 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
341 
мова/гендерна асіметрія у мові (ukr.) (androcentric language/gender asymmetry in 
language), андроцентризм/гендерная асимметрия в языке (androcentrism / gender 
asymmetry in language (rus.). 
5   Conclusions 
Under the term "anti-discrimination expertise of educational content" is understood the 
system of special terms, which has its own organization on the logical and linguistic levels 
and expresses a system of concepts at the junction of such sciences as jurisprudence, 
sociology and pedagogy. The terminology of the anti-discrimination expertise of school 
textbooks in Ukrainian, Russian and Modern Greek languages was formed under the 
influence of English as a language-producer and due to national strategies for terminating it. 
The main problems are as follows: onomasiological, when the meaning of the term is 
unevenly understood in the national languages; the problem of the expressive neutrality of 
the term, when its intensification and expressive marking of the interpretation takes place; 
synonymy of the term, which may be caused by the simultaneous operation of the terms of 
international and national origin or the phenomenon of inter-language synonymy, which is 
solved by the delineation of the fields of use and changes in the definitions of terms due to 
the expansion / narrowing of the volume, redistribution, the specification of the lexical value. 
References 
1. 
Αντωνίου Λ. (2015). Ενσωμάτωση της ∆ιάστασης της Μη-∆ιάκρισης στις ∆ιαδικασίες 
Σχεδιασμού, Εφαρμογής και Αναθεώρησης της Πολιτικής. Ευρωπαϊκό Πρόγραμμα 
PROGRESS. ∆ράση Ενάντια στις ∆ιακρίσεις: Ανάπτυξη ∆εξιοτήτων και Εκστρατεία 
Ευαισθητοποίησης και Πληροφόρησηςτου Κοινού: Ινστιτούτο Εργασίας Κύπρου. 
2. 
Κογκίδου ∆., Γκασούκα Μ. (2010). Αξιολόγηση των προτεινόμενων Αναλυτικών 
Προγραμμάτων των Επιτροπών στα διάφορα γνωστικά αντικείμενα με κριτήρια το φύλο 
και τον πολιτισμό.  Τεύχος 1. Λευκωσία: Παιδαγωγικό Ινστιτούτο Κύπρου. Υπηρεσία 
Ανάπτυξης Προγραμμάτων. 
3. 
Οδηγός φαρμογής του Πρότυπου Συστήματος ‘Ενταξης της Ισότητας των Φυλών στις 
πολιτικές των ∆ήμων, (2011). Υπουργείο Εσωτερικών, Γενική Γραμματεία Ισώτητας 
των Φυλών. 
4. 
Πανταζής Β. (2015). Αντιρατσιστική Εκπαίδευση. Ζωγράφου: Εθνικό Μετσόβιο 
Πολυτεχνείο 
5. 
A comparative analysis of non-discrimination law in Europe – 2017. Directorate-
General for Justice and Consumers. Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European 
Union. 
6. 
Council Directive 2000/43/EC (2000) implementing the principle of equal treatment 
between persons irrespective of racial or ethnic origin [πρόσβαση 12 Ιουλίου 2019]. 
∆ιαθέσιμο από:  
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:32000L0043&from=en  
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
342 
7. 
Voyevutko Natalya, Kuligina Elena. (2019). Formation of Criteria of the Anti-
Discrimination Analysis of School Textbooks in the Ukrainian Educational Field. Στο: 
International Scientific Conference «SOCIETY. INTEGRATION. EDUCATION». 
Rezekne, May 24th-25th, 2019. pp.460-470 
8. 
Воєвутко Н. 
(2018). 
Антидискримінаційна 
експертиза 
підручників: 
досвід 
Республіки Кіпр. Проблеми сучасного підручника. Київ: Педагогічна думка. pp. 44-
54. 
9. 
Воронина О. А. (1998). Гендерная экспертиза законодательства РФ о средствах 
массовой информации . Москва: МЦГИ. Проект гендерная экспертиза.  
10. Д’яков А.С., Кияк Т.Р., Куделько З. Б. (2000). Основи термінoтворення: Семантичні 
та соціолінгвістичні аспекти. Київ: Видивничій дім «КМ Academia». 
11. Денисова А.А. Словарь гендерных терминов. Региональная общественная 
организация "Восток-Запад: Женские Инновационные Проекты". Москва: 
Информация XXI век, 2002. 256 с. 
12. Дрожжина, Т., Дубовик, О., Забуга, Н., Косьмій, О., Малахова, О., Марущенко, О., 
Михайловська, Н., Салахова, Я. & Селіваненко В. (2018). Експертиза шкільних 
підручників: інструктивно-методичні матеріали для експертів щодо здійснення 
антидискримінаційної експертизи електронних версій проектів підручників, 
поданих на конкурсний відбір проектів підручників для 5 та 10 класів закладів 
загальної середньої освіти. Київ: Інститут педагогіки НАПН України,  ДНУ Інститут 
модернізації змісту освіти. 
13. Інструктивно-методичні 
матеріали 
для 
проведення 
експертами 
експертиз 
електронних версій проектів підручників (2018). Наказ Міністерства освіти і науки  
України від 31.10.2018 № 1183. [πρόσβαση 09 Ιουλίου 2019]. ∆ιαθέσιμο από: 
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1nnbIUaTMfBmiEgIf8YHBOjnQiwtdDgyE/view. 
14. Кащишин Н. Е. (2014). Експресивність термінів англомовного дипломатичного 
дискурсу. Філологічні науки. Книга 2. [πρόσβαση 17 Ιουλίου 2019]. ∆ιαθέσιμο από: 
http://intrel.lnu.edu.ua/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/Nzfn_2014_2_19.pdf . 
15. Кодекс Росийской Федерации об административных правонарушениях от 
30.12.2001 №195-ФЗ (ред. от 03.07.2019). [πρόσβαση 10 Ιουλίου 2019]. ∆ιαθέσιμο 
από: http://docs.cntd.ru/document/901807667. 
16. Липатова С.Д. (2007). Использование гендерного подхода в разработке 
содержания учебной литературы по педагогике. Екатеринбург: Автореферат 
диссертации на соискание ученой степени кандидата педагогических наук по 
специальности 13.00.01. – общая педагогика, история педагогики и образования. 
17. Малахова, О. А., 
Марущенко, О. А., 
Дрожжина, Т. В., 
Салахова, Я. В. 
& 
Селіваненко, В. В. (2016). Теоретико-методологічні засади антидискримінаційної 
експертизи 
підручників. 
За 
О. М. Топузов 
(ред.), 
Експертиза 
шкільних 
підручників: інструктивно-методичні матеріали для експертизи проектів 
підручників для 9 класу загальноосвітніх навчальних закладів. Київ: Педагогічна 
думка. С. 29 – 41. 
18. Порядок формирования федерального перечня учебников, рекомендуемых к 
использованию при реализации имеющих государственную аккредитацию 
образовательных программ начального общего, основного общего, среднего 
общего образования. Приказ МОН РФ от 18.07.2016 г. N 870. [πρόσβαση 13 
Ιουλίου 
2019]. 
∆ιαθέσιμο 
από: 
https://base.garant.ru/71458914/53f89421bbdaf741eb2d1ecc4ddb4c33/). 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
343 
19. Про засади запобігання та протидії дискримінації в Україні (2014). Закон України 
№ 
32. 
[πρόσβαση 
09 
Ιουλίου 
2019]. 
∆ιαθέσιμο 
από: 
https://zakon.rada.gov.ua/laws/show/5207-17  
20. Смирнова А. (2005). Учимся жить в обществе. Гендерный анализ школьных 
учебников. Москва. 79 с. 
21. Шевченко, З. В. (2016). Словник ґендерних термінів. Черкаси: видавець 
Чабаненко Ю. 
 
Наталя Воєвутко 
Αναπληρώτρια Καθηγήτρια στο Κρατικό Πανεπιστήμιο Μαριούπολης 
Ηλ-ταχ.: voyevutko0905@gmail.com 
 
 
Юлія Федорова 
Αναπληρώτρια Καθηγήτρια στο Κρατικό Πανεπιστήμιο Μαριούπολης 
Ηλ-ταχ.: julfedorova84@gmail.com 
 
Αγγλοελληνικό γλωσσάριο με τους βασικούς ειδικούς όρους  
του κειμένου 
androcentric language – ανδροκεντρική γλώσσα 
benevolent sexism – καλοπροαίρετος σεξισμός 
discriminatory practices – πρακτικές διακρίσεων 
gender asymmetry – ασυμμετρία μεταξύ των φύλων 
hostile sexism – εχθρικός σεξισμός 
polarization – πόλωση 
quantitative disproportion of both sexes representation –  
ποσοτική δυσαναλογία της εκπροσώπησης των δύο φύλων 
segregation – διαχωρισμός 
signs of discrimination – σημεία διάκρισης 
tower seclusion – terem-απομόνωση  
(στην Αρχαία Ρωσία terem είναι μια κατοικία στην κορυφή 
του σπιτιού ή ένα σπίτι υπό μορφή πύργου) 
toxic masculinity – τοξικός ανδρισμός 
 
