SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/9th%20Conference/Papers-and-speakers/9th_16-19-13_DeCesarisJanet-TrypanagnostopoulouSofia_Paper3_V02.pdf

ΕΛΕΤΟ – 9o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2013 
 
211 
16     Using a parallel corpus as a dictionary resource: studying idioms in 
an EN-GR parallel corpus 
    
Sofia Trypanagnostopoulou, Janet DeCesaris 
ABSTRACT  
While parallel corpora have been widely used in several language applications, they have not been 
extensively exploited as a tool in bilingual lexicography. However, the amount of information that a parallel 
corpus offers to the lexicographer can considerably improve the quality of bilingual dictionaries. In the 
present paper we explore the potentials of a parallel corpus as a lexicographic resource, focusing on the 
examination of idiomatic expressions of the language pair English-Greek. Idioms are often underrepresented 
in lexicography, especially in bilingual dictionaries. As a first step to address this issue we decided to 
examine idiomatic expressions in a bilingual context. For this purpose we created a bilingual corpus using as 
a source the English TED talks and their Greek translations (http://www.ted.com/). After having compiled and 
aligned the corpus, we were able to extract the idiomatic expressions contained and to identify the main 
translation strategies used. Then, we used a sample of these idiomatic expressions in order to examine their 
lexicographic representation in bilingual English-Greek dictionaries. Our main focus was to investigate firstly 
if these expressions are included or not, what kind of information do the dictionaries provide (register, 
grammatical information, translation equivalents, notes, examples, etc.) and to propose improvements based 
on the data we found in our corpus. 
Χρήση σωμάτων κειμένων ως λεξικογραφική πηγή:μελέτη ιδιωματικών 
εκφράσεων σε Ελληνο-αγγλικό σώμα κειμένων 
    
Σοφία Τρυπαναγνωστοπούλου, Janet DeCesaris 
ΠΕΡΙΛΗΨΗ 
Ενώ τα παράλληλα σώματα κειμένων (ΣΚ) έχουν ευρέως χρησιμοποιηθεί σε διάφορες γλωσσικές 
εφαρμογές, δεν έχουν αξιοποιηθεί εκτενώς ως εργαλεία στη δίγλωσση λεξικογραφία. Το πλήθος, ομως, των 
πληροφοριών που προσφέρει ένα παράλληλο ΣΚ στο λεξικογράφο, μπορεί να βελτιώσει σημαντικά την 
ποιότητα ενός δίγλωσσου λεξικού. Στην παρούσα εργασία εξετάζουμε της δυνατότητες των παράλληλων ΣΚ 
ώς λεξικογραφικές πηγές, εστιάζοντας την προσοχή μας στη μελέτη των ιδιωματικών εκρφράσεων του 
γλωσσικού ζεύγουςαγγλικά-ελληνικά. Τα λεξικά -και ιδιαίτερα τα δίγλωσσα- συχνά δεν καλύτπυν επαρκώς τις 
ιδιωματικές εκφράσεις. Ως πρώτο βημα για να προσεγγίσουμε το ζήτημα, αποφασίσαμε να εξετάσουμε τις 
ιδιωματικές εκφράσεις σε ένα δίγλωσσο περιβάλλον. Για το σκοπό αυτό, δημιουργήσαμε ένα δίγλωσσο ΣΚ 
χρησιμοποιώντας 
ως 
πηγή 
τις 
αγγλικές 
ομιλίες 
TED 
και 
τις 
ελληνικές 
μεταφράσεις 
τους. 
(http://www.ted.com/). Αφού συντάξαμε και αντιστοιχίσαμε το ΣΚ, προχωρήσαμε σε εξαγωγή των 
ιδιωματικών εκφράσεων και εντοπίσαμε τις μεταφραστικές στρατηγηκές που χρησιμοποιήθηκαν. Στη 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 9o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2013 
 
212 
συνέχεια χρησιμοποιήσαμε ένα δείγμα των εκφράσεων αυτών, προκειμένου να μελετήσουμε τη 
λεξικογραφική τους απεικόνηση στα δίγλωσσα αγγλο-ελληνικά λεξικά. Σε πρώτο στάδιο μελετήσαμε το κατά 
πόσο οι εκφράσεις αυτές εμπεριέχονται στα λεξικά ή όχι, τι είδους πληροφορίες παρέχονται (επίπεδο ύφους, 
γραμματικές πληροφορίες, μεταφραστικά ισοδύναμα, σημειώσεις, παραδείγματα, κλπ.) και προτείναμε 
βελτιώσεις με βάση τα δεδομένα που συλλέξαμε από το ΣΚ. 
0   Introduction  
Phraseology and especially idiomatic expressions are an important part of every language. They 
have strong cultural bonds andthey are considered to be one of the most difficult parts in 
language acquisition, both for native and non-native speakers. Undoubtedly, they require special 
attention in lexicography, because of their distinctive characteristics, and the lack of 
compositionality of their meaning. However, they are often underrepresented in dictionaries, 
especially in bilingual ones. In our attempt to address the issue, we will examine how the use of 
a parallel a parallel corpus as a lexicographic resource can improve the representation of 
idiomatic expressions, in bilingual English-Greek dictionaries.  
The lexicographic representation of phraseology is usually problematic due to various factors. 
One of the first difficulties is the arbitrary borders among the various types of phraseological 
units. Despite the long academic discussion about its terminology and classification, to date 
there is no standard taxonomy of phraseology. Another difficult issue for the lexicographer is the 
process of selecting which idioms are important to be included in the dictionary and which are 
not. The position of the idioms in the macrostructure and microstructure of a dictionary has 
always been a matter of discussion, since accessibility to phrases in the dictionary is not 
straightforward, yet is clearly of primary importance from the perspective of users.  
Equally significant is the issue of variation of the idiomatic expressions in terms of grammar, 
syntax and morphology. As mentioned by Moon (1996), while corpus evidence shows that the 
form of idiomatic expressions is not fixed, this variability is under-represented in dictionaries. 
Also, as idioms are used both in written and oral speech, and in various contexts, they might be 
used in several registers. This usually creates problems for non-native speakers, who are some 
of the main addressees of bilingual dictionaries. Last but not least is the issue of translation 
equivalence. The translation of idiomatic expressions in bilingual dictionaries is challenging. 
Idioms often have a metaphorical base, and thus they have a strong connection to the culture 
associated with a particular language. According to Mona Baker (1992:68-69), significant 
difficulties for translators include the lack of equivalence in the target language in the case of 
culture specific idioms or expressions, the use of an idiom in a different context in the target 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 9o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2013 
 
213 
language, and finally the fact that an idiom may be used in the source language in both a literal 
and idiomatic sense at the same time. 
Despite the importance of the English language in Greek society, there are limited options for 
users of English-Greek dictionaries and even fewer options when considering dictionaries of 
phraseology. The existing dictionaries are used both for decoding and encoding purposes, while 
English is used as an intermediate language for other users. Speakers of third languages (i.e. 
Arabic) might use an English-Greek dictionary due to a lack (or the poor quality) of an Arabic-
Greek dictionary.  
1   The role of parallel corpora in bilingual lexicography  
A lexicographic study today is almost unthinkable without the use of real language data. While 
parallel corpora have been widely used in several fields such as translator training, machine 
translation, contrastive linguistics, and various language applications, they have not been 
extensively exploited as a tool in bilingual lexicography. However, we believe that the amount of 
information that a parallel corpus offers to lexicographers can considerably improve the quality of 
bilingual dictionaries.Firstly, by having access to the source texts, lexicographers can see the 
actual use of an idiom and can extract information about variation, frequency, morphology, 
usage pragmatic or cultural correlations, etc.In addition, a parallel corpus always offers a 
translation equivalent in target language. A parallel corpus consists of texts that have already 
been translated; therefore, we can find there the solutions that the translators have proposed to 
real translation problems. For this reason, we consider that the equivalents proposed by the 
translators could be good candidates to be included in a bilingual dictionary. Finally, a parallel 
corpus is a rich source of phrases, which can be used as examples of use. 
Of course, we should keep in mind that the translations provided in the corpus are highly 
context-dependent and this means that they might be a solution which can work only in the 
specific context; therefore, they might not be appropriate candidates as dictionary equivalents. 
Aparallel corpus usually gives us only a single version of a translation, and the quality of the 
translator determines the quality of the translation. One solution to this would be to include 
various versions of translations of the same texts, which is impractical. Salkie (2008) suggests 
the following: (a) know which is the source language; (b) be sure that the translator was a skilled 
professional; (c) guarantee that the translation was checked; and (d) know that the translation 
was published by an organization which takes quality seriously. Additionally, we should make 
sure to use a balanced corpus of contemporary language. Parallel corpora diminish the role of 
human intuition; however, this does not mean that lexicographers should exclusively rely on 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 9o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2013 
 
214 
them. As Sinclair (1985) points out, personal introspection is a factor that will inevitably play a 
big part in the decisions made by lexicographers – in evaluating evidence rather than creating it. 
2   Exploratory Study 
As a first step to address this issue, we decided to examine idiomatic expressions in a bilingual 
context and to compare our findings with two English-Greek dictionaries. For this purpose we 
created a parallel corpus of English texts and their Greek translations. After having compiled and 
aligned the corpus, we were able to extract the idiomatic expressions contained and to identify 
the main translation strategies used. Then, we used a sample of these idiomatic expressions in 
order to examine their lexicographic representation in bilingual English-Greek dictionaries, and 
compared them with the information provided by our corpus.  
2.1   Corpus description 
We used as a source for our parallel corpus a number of English TED talks and their Greek 
translations (http://www.ted.com/1).We chose to collect TED talks because of the following 
characteristics and the advantages they offer. They are of free access in the internet and without 
copyright, while they are provided both in audiovisual (sound and subtitles) and in text form 
(original script and translations). There is a certain guarantee of the quality of the translations, as 
they provide the name of the translator and the reviser. Because the texts were spoken, they are 
likely to contain several, and possibly many, multiword expressions. Despite the oral language, 
the register it not very low and this means that and expressions used are appropriated to be 
included in a bilingual dictionary. Finally, a corpus from these texts would be very wide in terms 
of language use and vocabulary as the subjects of TED talks vary from art, technology, design, 
politics and everyday life stories. Our corpus is consisted of 30 TED talks with their translation 
into Greek. The total number of English words is 35.503 (average 1183.43 words per text) and 
the total of Greek words is 33.033 (average 1101.1 words per text).  
2.2   Extraction and classification of phraseological Units 
We extracted the phraseological Units manually and we classified them based on the taxonomy 
proposed by Moon (1998) into: Anomalous collocations, which are problematic in terms of 
                                                           
1  
TED (Technology, Entertainment and Design) is a global set of conferences owned by the private non-
profit Sapling Foundation, under the slogan "ideas worth spreading”. It started out (in 1984) as a 
conference bringing together people from three worlds: Technology, Entertainment, Design.  
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 9o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2013 
 
215 
lexicogrammar and include ill-formed collocations, cranberry collocations, defective collocations 
and phraseological collocations (by and large, of course); Formulae, which are problematic in 
terms of pragmatics and include simple formulae, sayings, proverbs and similes (I’m sorry to 
say, an eye for an eye, enough is enough); and Metaphors, which areproblematic in terms of 
semantics and include transparent metaphors, semi-transparent metaphors and opaque 
metaphors: (behind someone’s back, kick the bucket). 
From the total of 220 phraseological units extracted, 52 are anomalous collocations, 70 formulae 
and 76 metaphors. Of course the margins between the categories are not very clear; so many 
times a phraseological unit can be classified to more than one group. For the purpose of the 
present study, we focused on idiomatic expressions, namelythe metaphorical-based 
phraseology, which includes mainly the third category (metaphors), but also some formulaeor 
anomalous collocations that have metaphorical meaning. More specifically we examined: 76 
metaphors (change my mind), 21 formulae (come to the conclusion) and 1 anomalous 
collocation (lo and behold). On the other hand, some phrases appeared more than one time in 
the corpus, mainly in variations. So, in total we examined 119 phraseological elements, including 
the multiple entries.  
In the corpus we identified the following translations strategies: (1) Equivalence: (same meaning 
– same form) even though it is difficult to have perfect equivalence, we marked as “equivalence” 
the cases where the translator uses an idiom of the target language with the same meaning as 
the one of the original phrase. From the total of 119 phrases found in the corpus, 63 were 
translated by an equivalent expression: with open arms με ανοιχτές αγκάλες. (2) Paraphrase: 
(same meaning – different form) when the translator transfers the meaning, but uses a lexeme in 
the TL which is not idiomatic. In our corpus, 28 phrases were translated by paraphrase: They 
were dressed to the nines Είχαν εξεζητημένο ντύσιμο. (3) Literal Translation: (different meaning-
same form) when the translator uses parallel lexemes in the TL, but the meaning is not the same 
and the final result lacks functionality. In our corpus, we recorded 11 cases of literal translation: 
little yellow brick road - κίτρινος πέτρινος δρόμος. (4) Omission: when the translator totally omits 
the phraseological unit. Four of the 119 phrases were omitted in their Greek translation: And 
then I went into geology, "rocks for jocks." This is easy. - Έπειτα μπήκα στη γεωλογία, αυτό ήταν 
πιο εύκολο. 
We can observe that the corpus offers translation equivalents for almost half of thecases, while 
we have fewer cases of paraphrase and only a few literal translations and omissions. This is 
very important, because it shows the good quality of the translations, which means that the 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 9o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2013 
 
216 
equivalents could be good candidates to be used by the lexicographers.  
2.3   Comparison with dictionary representation of phraseological units 
After extracting the phraseological units from the corpus, we examined their lexicographic 
representation in two bilingual English - Greek dictionaries: Oxford English-Greek Learner´s 
Dictionary (D. N. Stavropoulos & A. S. Hornby) and Collins English-Greek Dictionary. The main 
criteria for selecting the dictionaries were their overall satisfactory quality, the adequate amount 
of information they provide and their popularity in terms of usage.  
Firstly, we examined if the expressions found in the corpus are included or not. The table below 
shows the phraseological coverage of the two dictionaries: 
DICTIONARY 
NOT INCUDED 
INCLUDE SIMILAR 
EXPRESSION 
INCLUDED
INCLUDED IN 
VARIATION 
INCLUDED WITH 
DIFFERENT MEANING 
OXFORD 
43 
5 
43 
6 
1 
COLLINS 
49 
3 
34 
6 
6 
 
As we can see from the table above, the Oxford dictionary does not include 43 out of 98 idioms 
found in the corpus, while it contains5 similar – but not exactly the same – expressions. For 
example, we cannot find the idiom: need to take time to, but we can find the phrase:take your 
time. In these cases, even though the expression provided by the dictionary is similar, it is not 
certain that the user will be able to understand it and use it properly. On the other hand, 43 out 
of 98 idioms are included in the corpus, while 6 are included in a variant form. For example, we 
cannot see the phrase: stops dead in her tracks, which we found in the corpus, but only the 
idiom: stop dead. Finally, one expression is included, but not with the same meaning as in the 
corpus: we can find the idiom: at the bottom, but only in its literal meaning (στοκάτωμέρος) and 
not in the metaphorical meaning as used in the text (deeply - καταβάθος). Likewise, in Collins 
dictionary 49 out of 98 idioms are not included, 3 are given in a similar expression, 34 are 
included, 6 include a variation and 6 are given with a different meaning.  
What we can conclude from these numbers is that there is a rather low percentage of dictionary 
coverage in both dictionaries Of course we should keep in mind that it is not always possible or 
useful to include all the idiomatic expressions of a word in a bilingual dictionary, especially in a 
paper edition, where the limitation of space restricts the lexicographic options. However, among 
the idioms that we found in the corpus that are not present in the dictionaries, there are many 
phrases which have a discoursal function: I didn't get the memo, take a second, you betcha. 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 9o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2013 
 
217 
These types of idioms are problematic in terms of pragmatics and since they are frequently 
used, especially in oral speech, it is, we believe, very important to include them in a bilingual 
dictionary. Moreover, some of the idioms not found in the dictionaries, such as little yellow brick 
road, Beam me up, Scotty have strong cultural connotations. The user would not be able to 
understand and use these expressions without previous knowledge, thus it would be useful to 
get this information from the dictionary.Finally, some of the expressions have a highly opaque 
meaning: It was off and running, lo and behold, meet that bar. The user will not be able to find 
the meaning of such expressions by looking in the dictionary the meaning of their parts.  
Our next step was to investigate what kind of information the dictionaries provide in the 
microstructure of their entries (register, grammar, usage label, translation equivalents etc.). in 
comparison with the data we collected from our corpus.  
In some of the expressions Oxford uses the label (idm) for idiom, while Collins uses sometimes 
the label (fig.) for figurative. However, the criteria on this are not very clear. It seems that there is 
no standard categorization of phraseology in neither of the dictionaries. Regarding the register, 
Oxford gives some usage labels, such as (καθομ.) for Καθομιλουνένη, colloquial language. 
Collins, on the other hand, even though in the abbreviation list (in the introduction of the 
dictionary) includes various labels, such as Fml for formal, Hum for humorous, in the sample we 
examined we didn´t find any of them. In a bilingual context -where there is not always 
equivalence between the source and target language - information about the register is very 
important, as the user should be able to know how and where to use an expression. Collins 
dictionary provides a lot of grammatical information (in the wake of ως επακόλουθο (+GEN), To 
give sb a bad name δυσφημώ κν), while Oxford includes only a few (can/can't/could(n't) help 
doing sth μπορώ / δεν μπορώ να (αποφύγω να κάνω κάτι). Of course, this kind of information 
mentioned above can be also incorporated in the examples of usage. Both dictionaries include a 
lot of examples of idiomatic expressions, which are accompanied by their Greek translation: 
(Oxford) The affair is no longer in my hands η υπόθεση δεν είναι πλέον στα χέρια μου / στη 
δικαιοδοσία. (Collins) we were accused of giving the country a bad name overseas 
Κατηγορηθήκαμε ότι δυσφημήσαμε τη χώρα στο εξωτερικό. 
If we compare the equivalents proposed by the dictionaries with the corpus, we observe that in 
many any cases the translation is different. Even though the equivalent of the dictionary is not 
bad or wrong, the translation might offer an additional equivalent, which could be good candidate 
to be included in the dictionary: In the wake of => (Corpus) στη συνέχεια, (Oxford) από πίσω, 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 9o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2013 
 
218 
καταπόδι, μαζί, ως επακόλουθο, (Collins) ως επακόλουθο (+GEN). However, there are cases 
where the corpus can give an idiomatic equivalent, while the dictionary only gives an explanatory 
equivalent: stops dead in her tracks => (Corpus) κοκάλωσε, (Oxford) σταματάω απότομα. 
Sometimes the equivalent of the dictionary lacks naturalness. In this case the equivalent of the 
corpus, can give a solution: be/get out of control => (Corpus: It's out of your control) Δεν μπορείς 
να το ελέγξεις, (Oxford) αποχαλίνουμαι. In other cases, the corpus translation is closer to the 
register of the original than the proposed dictionary equivalent: spend a lot of time => (Corpus: 
spend so little time) περνάμε τόσο λίγο χρόνο, (Oxford) διαθέτω / αφιερώνω πολύ χρόνο για κτ. 
As mentioned above, in many cases the corpus provides different meanings than those of the 
dictionary. This automatically results in different equivalents: at the bottom => (Corpus) μέσα 
μου, (Oxford) κατά βάθος, (Collins) στο κάτω μέρος. And the same can also be seen in the 
variations of the expressions as different forms of an idiom could have different equivalents: 
something is going wrong => (Corpus) κάτι δεν πάει καλά, (Oxford: go wrong) α. Ακολουθώ 
λάθος κατεύθυνση, β. Αποτυγχάνω γ. Στραβώνω, χαλάω.  
3   Conclusions 
This paper is the first step of a larger study of corpus-based lexicographical representation of 
phraseology. More specifically, we used a small amount of data in order to see if interesting 
conclusions are possible and to examine and assess the suggested methodology. Our first 
results showed that the corpora can provide useful information about idiomatic expressions 
which is not included in the dictionaries we examined.  
One of the important results was the rather low coverage of idiomatic expressions in the two 
dictionaries in comparison to our corpus findings. Before rushing to conclusions, we should keep 
in mind the small size of our corpus, thus the limited sample of phraseological units we 
examined. And of course,as mentioned above, it is not possible – or even useful – for a 
dictionary to include every possible phraseological unit of an entry-word. However, the very low 
percentage of dictionary coverage gives an indication about the quality of the dictionary in terms 
of phraseology representationand further research seems to be necessary. The limited use of 
real linguistic data is characteristic of many bilingual dictionaries, as opposed to monolingual 
dictionaries, in which corpus data has been extensively used for over thirty years now. However, 
as parallel corpora offer texts that have actually been translated, we can assume that they are 
likely to contain elements that one might look up in a dictionary. Therefore, it would improve the 
representation of phraseological coverage if the lexicographer would rely on a parallel corpus to 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 9o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2013 
 
219 
select which idioms to include in the dictionary.  
Another interesting point of this study is the fact that the corpus can reveal the variation of 
phraseological units. A significant number of the idioms we extracted from the corpusappeared 
in adifferent form than the formgivenin the dictionaries. The lexicographical challenge is 
therefore to examinehow this variation could be better represented in bilingual dictionaries. Of 
course, it is not possible to include all the variations of an expression in a bilingual dictionary, 
however, the corpus can give us a clue about the most important or the most frequently used 
forms. Furthermore, from the small sample of the phrases we examined, we observed that in 
many cases the corpus gave us different or even more successfultranslation equivalents than 
the ones proposed by the dictionaries.In some cases the dictionary provides an explanatory 
equivalent, while - as found in corpus- there is a functional equivalent.As we have seen in our 
corpus, almost half of the phrases were translated by an equivalent expression. These 
translations could be used from the lexicographer as functional equivalents, which can transfer 
not only the meaning, but also the idiomaticity of the original. Of course, we should keep in mind 
that translations are context specific and proposed by the translator with an audience in mind, 
while the dictionaries should include information that is not context-bound. However, a larger 
corpus could cover as many occasions as possible, and could give many equivalents to the 
lexicographer. This would automatically diminish the role of human intuition; the equivalents 
would be more functional and natural.  
As mentioned above, the present study used a small amount of language data to extract and 
examine idiomatic expressions in a bilingual context. In order to achievemore accurate results, 
we should enrich our parallel corpus, including texts of literature, and audiovisual material 
(movies, documentaries, television series etc.), or the European Parliament corpus. Further 
study can be carried out on how this model could be used not only in general purpose bilingual 
dictionaries, but also in specialized dictionaries, and more specifically on the representation of 
phraseology in terminological resources.  
4   References 
[1] 
Baker, M. (1992) In other words : a coursebook on translation. London: Routledge. 
[2] 
Collins English-Greek Dictionary (2nd ed., 2006).London: HarperCollins. 
[3] 
Moon R. (1996). Data, Description, and Idioms in Corpus Lexicography.In Euralex ’96 
Proceedings. Gothenburg: Göteborg University, 245-256. 
[4] 
Moon, R. (1998).Fixed Expressions and Idioms in English.A Corpus-Based Approach. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
[5] 
Salkie, R. (2008). “How can a lexicographer use a translation corpus?” In Proceedings of 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 9o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2013 
 
220 
the International Symposium of Using Corpora in Contrastive and Translation 
Studies.Zhejiang University, Hangzhou. 
[6] 
Sinclair, J. (1985), Lexicographic Evidence. in: Ilson R. (ed.), Dictionaries, lexicography and 
language learning, ELT Documents 120, Oxford: Pergamon Press, 61—68. 
[7] 
Stavropoulos, D. N. & A. S. Hornby. (2007) Oxford English-Greek Learner’s Dictionary. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 
 
Janet DeCesaris 
Associate Professor of Translation and Interpreting 
InstitutUniversitari de Lingüística Aplicada -  UniversitatPompeuFabra 
RocBoronat, 138 - 08018 Barcelona 
E-mail: janet.decesaris@upf.edu  
 
Sofia Trypanagnostopoulou 
PhD Candidate - UniversitatPompeuFabra 
RocBoronat, 138 - 08018 Barcelona 
E-mail: sofitrip@yahoo.gr  
 
 
