SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/10th%20Conference/Papers-and-speakers/10th_27-26-35_Jan%20Roukens-CV_V02.pdf

ELETO – 10th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, Greece, 12–14 November 2015 
 
 
 
Jan Roukens 
Board member of language and terminology organisations 
E-mail: jroukens@hotmail.com 
 
 
Curriculum Vitae 
Jan Roukens (Bandung, 1937) grew up in Indonesia. He moved to the Netherlands in 1950 where 
he obtained a degree in Physics at the Delft Technical University (1961). After military service he 
worked for several companies and universities: IBM, Leiden University and Philips. From 1973-
1981 he managed a company for the computerisation and networking of a dozen hospitals in the 
Netherlands. During this period he founded the worldwide International Medical Informatics 
Association and chaired the Medical Information WG of the European Commission (EC). In 1981 
he joined the new R&D framework programme of the EC and was involved with the EC strategy 
to promote the European Language Industry. In the early 90s he launched the EU’s Multilingual 
Information Society programme (Luxembourg, 1995). Since his retirement early 2002 he advises 
companies and non-profit organisations in the language & terminology fields. He favours the 
promotion of the diversity of European languages and he is particularly concerned about the trend 
in universities and in international companies active in Europe, to use English as their common 
language instead of the country’s national languages. In his view this will lead to serious social 
and cultural tensions in those countries and to the degradation of their languages.  With inevitable 
consequences for the quality in all domains of life.  
He is a board member of Dutch-Flemish and European cultural and language associations and 
member of the European Platform for Multilingualism representing the EAFT.  
He lives in Brussels, married having six adult children and a growing number of grandchildren.  
