SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/6th%20Conference/6th_00-NiGhallchobhairFidelma_V03.pdf

ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
1 
 
1
Terminology Planning and Policies in Minority/Minoritized Languages 
 
Fidelma Ní Ghallchobhair 
 
Loanwords in lesser-used languages 
While all languages borrow words from other languages - sometimes quite extensively – this feature 
does not always diminish the integrity of the borrowing language. English is an obvious example of a 
language which has borrowed rampantly and yet continues to develop vigorously. Many major 
languages exhibit less positive results when viewed in terms of loanwords, especially from English. 
The minor or lesser-used language is even  more vulnerable and it is probably true to say that the 
Irish language is the one with the greatest experience of daily exposure to English influence.  
We in the EAFT are aware of rising levels of anxiety among various European language communities 
in relation to increased use of English as the main language of instruction in technical areas and as a 
source language for terminology. This feature, naturally, is leading to domain loss in many hitherto 
vigorous languages. It has been suggested that the minor or minoritized languages have more 
experience defending their corner and may have developed some novel strategies. For this reason, 
we decided to focus on the policies employed by some ‘smaller’ languages to see if there were some 
patterns or pointers which might be helpful to other language communities. Several language 
communities presented their terminology policies at a seminar held in Dublin in July 2007, including 
Welsh, Catalan, Basque, Roma, Ladin, Slovenian, Amazigh (Berber), and Irish. We also heard a case 
study about terminology planning for the official languages of South Africa. The presentations showed 
that the circumstances and approaches in each language community were quite different. For this 
reason, it was difficult to form an immediate overall impression which was to be the topic of this talk. 
We plan to review the material at a later date, and carry out some further discussion and research 
with a view to placing the material in context. Thus, I propose to present here one example of an 
aspect of terminological practice which has been incorporated in national terminology planning. This 
is a study of the historical development of loanwords in my own language, Irish, and how we have 
incorporated these features into our approaches to term formation.     
The nature of loanwords 
A loanword is a word which is “adopted from another language and completely or partially 
naturalized”1. There may be various reasons why a language community opts to borrow a foreign 
word. We might expect that the primary reason would be that the concept is foreign to us and that we 
cannot readily find an equivalent in our own language for it.  
Another reason for borrowing seems to have to do with status or fashion, in that the community 
perceive the incoming words as being more fashionable or having a higher status than equivalents in 
their own language might have. The fashion of using French terminology on menus in English is a 
                                                           
1American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
2 
 
2
clear example of this motivation, although the first reason mentioned above may come into play in 
some instances.   
Although terminological theory holds that concepts are independent of language, it seems that this is 
often not the case. This is because languages conceptualize differently, and these differences are not 
always evident to members of a language community encountering a foreign word for the first time. 
Thus, they may translate the foreign terms they hear in a literal way, which often does not convey the 
meaning of the concept satisfactorily in their own language, or else they may simply borrow the 
foreign word or term as it stands. In the latter case, depending on phonetic differences between the 
two languages in question, the term as loanword may sound somewhat different to the original. 
Furthermore, it may need to be spelled quite differently, depending on the orthographic rules of the 
languages in question.  
General approach to term formation 
When we come to name new concepts we need to know the relevant languages at a deep level and 
not simply translate the words. We need to identify the underlying concept for which the incoming 
term stands, and also the related concepts. Ideally, we need to construct a concept system and 
analyse the relationships between the concepts. We need to discuss the new concept and propose 
candidate terms. Then we need to reach consensus among specialists on the ideal candidate term. 
Finally we need to have an effective method of disseminating the new term. All this activity requires a 
system, and to operate the system we require training and resources. This implies that there be 
awareness, prioritization and planning at management level.  
Revisiting history 
There are no blank slates in terminology work, for there will always be history, there will always be 
related concepts, previously agreed terms, and similar terms if not synonyms. It is our duty as 
terminologists to examine the history to identify the patterns already established and to be true to 
these patterns in the formation of new terms. Thus, we need to develop a system based on existing 
patterns, and to be ready to update or modify the system as circumstances change. Much as we 
would like our terminology to be stable, the reality is that terminology and language, like life, are ever 
in a state of flux. Not all terminology, of course, is liable to change but we must bear in mind that 
fashions come and go, new concepts are conceived and others become obsolete, some terms 
become politicallly incorrect and need to be replaced with more acceptable terms (we no longer talk of 
a person being ‘mentally handicapped’ but as having an ‘intellectual disability’), some terms are 
deemed old-fashioned (women wear ‘dresses’ nowadays rather than ‘frocks’) and are replaced by 
more fashionable ones, and some other terms were clearly wrong for one reason or another (‘trans-
Plutonian planet’ now needs to be revised in light of recent astronomical discovery) and need to be 
replaced.  
Cognates 
Whatever languages we speak, they all have history and part of that history is that they are 
descended from some, usually now extinct, ancestral language. Most European languages, for 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
3 
 
3
instance, are descended from Indo-European and inherited a core of cognate words or terms. Many 
of these cognates have to do with personal family relationships (father, mother, brother, sister, me, 
you) – here are some examples: 
 
Irish  
máthair  
athair  
bráthair, 
deartháir 2 
trí  
mé  
English  
mother  
father  
brother  
three  
me  
French  
mère  
père  
frère  
trois  
moi  
Spanish  
madre  
padre  
hermano  
tres  
me  
Italian  
madre  
padre  
fratello  
tre  
me  
Portuguese  
mãe  
pai  
irmão  
três  
 
German  
Mutter  
Vater  
Bruder  
drei  
mich  
Dutch  
moeder  
vader  
broer  
drie  
mij  
Norwegian  
mor  
far  
bror  
tre  
meg  
Ícelandic  
móðir  
faðir  
 
þrír  
 
Lithuanian  
mater  
tèvas  
brolis  
tri  
manen  
Latin  
mater  
pater  
frater  
tres  
me  
Greek  
meter, 
μητέρα  
πατέρας  
αδελφός  
treis, τρία  
me  
Sanskrit  
matar  
patar  
bhrator  
tri  
me  
  
As can be seen from the table, most of these cognates carry across several far-flung European 
languages and come from an Indo-European ancestral language. Those marked in red are words 
which clearly have alternative roots.  
 
The origin of loanwords 
Loanwords arise from contact between one language community and another. This contact may arise 
from members of a language community going forth to foreign destinations, whether in the form of 
trading, other professional involvement, travel, living abroad, emigration, or through exposure to 
foreign media in the form of news, literature, art, film, the Internet or some other format. On the other 
hand, contact may arise due to incoming influences, be they in the form of travellers, traders, 
missionaries, settlers, colonizers or incoming media. These types of contact may be sporadic, 
spontaneous or chance happenings. On the other hand, an accelerated influx of loanwords into a 
language usually accompanies major sociopolitical, sociocultural or socioeconomic change. With 
                                                           
2 In Modern Irish, a blood‐brother is referred to as deartháir < O.I. derbráthair < derb‐ + bráthair, derb meaning ‘sure, 
certain, genuine’, while bráthair is reserved for brothers in a religious community. 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
4 
 
4
intensity of contact over a prolonged period, the absorption of loanwords intensifies. Thus, the study 
of loanwords can reveal historical fault lines.  
 
Loanwords and Irish – a brief history 
An overview of the main historical developments in Ireland over the past sixteen centuries reveals the 
interconnectedness of history, geography, economics and language: 
• 
AD 432: the arrival of Christianity –> borrowings from Latin;  
• 
AD 795: the arrival of Viking invaders –> borrowings from Old Norse;  
• 
AD 1169: the arrival of Norman invaders –> borrowings from French;  
• 
15th/16th centuries: British colonization –> borrowings from English; 
• 
17th century: conquest or flight of the native ruling class –> English becomes dominant 
language;  
• 
17th – 19th centuries: Irish becomes the language of the marginalized, intensified by 
famine and emigration; 
• 
20th century: independence for three quarters of the island leading to governmental 
engagement to preserve the language -> terminology needed for textbooks, legislation, 
media; 
• 
21st century: Language Act, EU status, leading to a major translation industry.  
 
Historical and linguistic fault lines in Irish history  
With the arrival of Christianity in the fifth century, Irish absorbed loanwords from Latin, many 
concerning concepts related to writing and learning, and to religious matters. In the table below the 
words in red show that some of these languages did not make the same borrowings, or that they did 
not develop in quite the same ways.  
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
5 
 
5
 
Latin  
Irish  
English  
French  
Spanish  
legendum  
léann  
learning 
savoir 
conocimientos  
schola  
scoil  
school 
école 
escuela, colegio  
penna  
peann  
pen 
plume 
pluma 
liber  
leabhar  
book 
livre 
libro  
scribere  
scríobh  
write 
écrire 
escribir  
littera  
litir  
letter 
lettre 
letra  
sacerdos  
sagart  
priest  
prêtre  
cura  
episcopus  
easpag  
bishop  
évêque  
obispo  
ecclesia  
eaglais  
church3  
église  
iglesia  
crux  
cros  
cross4  
croix  
cruz  
templum  
teampall  
temple  
temple  
templo  
infernum  
ifreann  
hell  
enfer  
infierno  
 
 
Sometimes loanwords were imported more than once and have survived with different meanings, in 
other words, they have been been borrowed as different concepts or applied to different concepts. For 
instance, in the eighth century the Latin word oratio was borrowed into Old Irish as ortha meaning (a) 
prayer, esp. a formal or memorized one, whether recited or sung; (b) an incantation, spell, charm), 
and the latter meaning survives in Modern Irish. The same word was borrowed again during the ninth 
century as óráid meaning (a) prayer (prob. a ritual prayer rather than an extempore one); (b) a 
speech, oration, and retains the latter meaning only in Modern Irish. Other borrowings from Latin 
include Nollaig (Christmas) < O.Ir. notlaic <la  natalicia, Cáisc (Easter) < O.Ir. cásc < la  pascha, 
abhlann (wafer, altar bread) < O.I. obla(e) <la oblatio, scéimh (beauty, appearance) < O.Ir. scíam, 
scéim < la schema. This last loanword is an example of Irish borrowing the same word more than 
once, this time at a considerable remove. The early borrowing of schema (in Latin, shape, figure, 
form) meant in Old Irish a figure of speech; form, appearance, guise; beauty, and is retained in 
Modern Irish as scéimh, meaning beauty of face or form; look, appearance. A more recent borrowing, 
scéim5, meaning a plan or scheme, came via the English form of the word, scheme. 
 
                                                           
3 But English retained ecclesia, ecclesial, ecclesiarch, ecclesiastic, ecclesiastical. 
4 Cross  is an example of a Latin loanword borrowed into Old English via Old Norse from Old Irish. Interestingly, 
the original Latin word was later borrowed unchanged into English as crux, apparently from Medieval Latin 
crux interpretum (commentator’s torment, i.e., a difficult passage in a text).    
5 This is the only Irish example cited throughout the article which was borrowed later than the year 1700. 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
6 
 
6
Since our forbears had neither the benefit of standardization nor of mass communication, many 
different spellings of some loanwords can be found in ancient sources. Here are the instances of the 
Latin loanword ecclesia (church) found in early Irish sources: 
  
eclis eclais eclas eglais æclis ęclais eagluis eglas ecailse æcaillse ecalsé ecalse ecailsi ecalsi eagailse 
eagailsi eguilsi eclaise eaglaise eagluise e(a)gluisi eglaisi ecolso ecolsa æcolsa æccalsa ǽccalsa 
ecalsa egalsa eaccalsa ecalsæ æcilso eccailsi eagluiseadhe eagluiseacha eagalsa eclasae eculsa 
ecailsib eagailsibh egluisibh ecalsaib eaglas eagluiseadh eagalsadh eclais, eclas 
i, ī, ā, f. (eccles‐) ns. eclis  Wb 16 d 6 . ind eclais  Tur. 60 . (ind) eclas  SR 4421.4923 .  LU 116 a 38 .  Fél. 
p. 4 .  BB 341 a 45 .  PH 3423 .  6896 . an eglais,  O'Dowley 15.11 . vs. a eclais  Ml 65 d 14 .  66 c 1 . as. 
æclis  Wb 28 d 26 . ęclais  Ml 65 d 5 . eclais  SR 4440 . eagluis  1 Cor. xvi 19 . eglas  YBL 154 b 22 . ds. 
æclis  Wb 11 d 16 .  28 d 24 . eclais  Ml 64 c 5 .  66 c 2 .  SR 4484 . gs. (a) (inna) ecailse  Ml 65 d 1 .  Tur. 
48 .  LU 30 a 25 . æcaillse  Wb 22 c 20 . ecalsé  SR 4242 . ecalse,  Cáin Ad. § 39 .  § 45 . ecailsi  IT i 
186.15 .  SR 4924 .  Trip. 16.31 ;  28.13 . ecalsi,  Cáin Ad. § 34 .  Trip. 2.18 . eagailse,  TSh. 3475 . 
eagailsi,  Studies 1919, 439 . eguilsi,  Fl. Earls 20.27 . (b) eclaise,  Laws iii 10.16 . eaglaise, GF,  Ir. 
Monthly 1919, 623 § 15 . eagluise,  Acts viii 1 .  Rev. ii 1 .  Luc. Fid. 389 z . e(a)gluisi,  Rom. xvi 5.   2 
Cor. i 1 . eglaisi,  O'Dowley 15.15 ;  20.20 . (c) ecolso  Wb 13 a 3 . ecolsa  11 d 6 . æcolsa  12 b 18 .  13 
a 27 . æccalsa  9 c 7 . ǽccalsa  7 c 8 . ecalsa,  Lism. L. 2459 .  2553 .  Acall. 2888 .  Ériu ii 204.20 .  Arch. 
iii 307 § 17 . egalsa,  Cáin Ad. § 53 . eaccalsa,  Studies 1921, 75 . ecalsæ,  BColm. 26.2 . æcilso  Wb 22 
c 11 . np. (a) ecailsi  RC xxvi 38.9 . eccailsi,  Cáin Ad. § 31 . ecalsi,  Laws v 14.10 .  Cáin Ad. § 30 . (b) 
eagluiseadhe [sic ]  1 Cor. xvi 19 . eagluiseacha,  Rom. xvi 4 .  Rev. i 20 . (c) ecalsa  Lism. L. 3923 . 
eagalsa  RC xxvi 38 n. 9 . ap. (a) ecailsi,  Trip. 110.18 . (b) eclasae  122.2 . (c) eculsa,  Fél. 4.17 . dp. (a) 
ecailsib,  Trip. 8.2 .  Maund. 50 . eagailsibh,  Keat. iii. 310 . (b) egluisibh,  Rev. ii 13 .  iii 22 . (c) ecalsaib, 
 Lism. L. 36 . gp. (a) eclas  PH 5589 .  Todd Lect. v 58.11 . (eclaise  PH 1663 , etc.  is not written out in 
the MS.) eaglas  IGT , Decl. § 130 . (b) eagluiseadh,  Rev. i 20 .  IGT , Decl. § 127 . eagalsadh  § 130 .6 
 
The rows of words in bold at the top show the variant spellings of the loanword in Old and Middle 
Irish, and the entries in blue refer to the sources in which they can be found. The Modern Irish spelling 
is ‘eaglais’.  
 
Loanwords from Old Norse 
As a result of the Viking invasions which began towards the end of the eighth century  leading to 
widespread Viking influence over the following two centuries, many loanwords entered Irish from Old 
Norse. Being primarily traders, merchants and seamen, the Norse legacy to Irish is characterized by 
loanwords to do with these fields of endeavour.  
                                                           
6 eDIL (electronic Dictionary of the Irish Language), www.dil.ie 
 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
7 
 
7
 
   
Loanwords from French 
The Norman invasion of Ireland began during the latter half of the 12th century and some French 
influence prevailed into the 14th century. The examples below show that Irish borrowed some 
loanwords in the fields of food and clothing, while others relate to administrative and social affairs, 
and stil others to literary matters.   
The fact that Irish borrowed garçon and épouser suggest the influence of new social mores. Of the 
words previously favoured for ‘boy’ - mac meaning ‘son’ and (loosely) a male descendent, macaomh 
meaning ‘beloved son’, and buachaill meaning ‘cowherd’ - the last is still in use, but garsún or gasúr 
are dominant, so much so that the latter variation by metathesis has come to mean child of either sex 
in the most densely populated Irish-speaking region.   
The loanword plúr is bidimensional, in that it was an early borrowing from O.Fr. flor (which later 
became fleur de farine – in the sense of the finest part of the wheat - and in Modern French 
abbreviated to farine). But not only does it still signify ‘flour’ in Irish, but it also carries the metaphorical 
sense demonstrated in ‘fleur de farine’, in that a beautiful woman is often referred to poetically as ‘plúr 
na mban’ (the flower of all women). The O.Ir. word bláth is still used as the normal word for ‘flower’, 
but is not used metaphorically in quite the same way.      
Old Norse 
Irish 
English 
French 
Spanish 
Danish 
Norwegian 
knappr 
cnaipe 
button 
bouton  
botón  
knap 
knapp  
bátr 
bád 
boat 
bateau 
barco, barca, 
embarcación  
båd; fartøj  
båt, fartøy  
ey 
í, inis, oileán  
island 
isle 
isla  
ø  
øy  
poki 
póca 
pocket 
poche  
bolsillo  
lomme; ‐lomme; 
lomme‐  
lomme  
bogi 
bogha 
bow 
arc 
arco  
bue; flitsbue  
bue  
marked 
margadh  
market 
marché  
mercado  
marked; 
markedsplads  
markedsplass, 
torg  
porskr 
trosc 
cod(fish) 
cabillaud 
bacalao 
 
torsk 
vindauga 
fuinneog 
window 
fenêtre; 
vitrine 
ventana, 
ventanilla 
vindue; 
udstillingsvindue 
vindu 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
8 
 
8
 
French, O.Fr.  
Irish 
English 
Spanish 
Norwegian 
bacon < bacoun 
bagún 
bacon 
tocino 
bacon, (salt) flesk 
orange < orenge 
oráiste 
orange 
naranja 
appelsin 
farine < fleur de 
farine < flur 
plúr 
flour 
harina 
(hvete)mel 
raisin sec < raisin 
risín 
raisin 
uva pasa 
rosin 
baron 
barún 
baron 
barón 
baron 
garçon 
garsún, gasúr, 
buachaill 
boy 
niño 
gutt 
épouser 
pós 
marry, 
espouse 
casarse 
gifte seg (med), 
bli gift 
boucle 
búcla 
buckle 
hebilla 
spenne 
robe 
róba 
robe 
manto 
lang kåpe, *kjole, 
*drakt 
goune 
gúna 
gown 
vestido largo 
(fin)kjole 
cave voûtée < 
vou(l)te 
boghta 
vault 
sótano; bodega 
hvelv, kjeller 
forêt <forest 
foraois 
forest 
bosque 
skog 
nature 
nádúr 
nature 
carácter;  
naturaleza 
natur; art, type, 
beskaffenhet 
region 
réigiún 
region 
región 
område, region 
raison 
réasún 
reason 
razón 
fornuft, forstand, 
dømmekraft 
texte 
téacs 
text 
texto 
tekst 
terme 
téarma 
term 
termino 
faguttrykk, 
vending 
 
Loanwords from other languages 
Irish also borrowed from Welsh (once our nearest linguistic neighbours), Greek (usually via Latin), 
and occasionally from other languages. The examples below from Welsh are suggestive of a 
storytelling context, the Spanish example of trade, the Hebrew of a biblical context and the Greek of 
glosses on religious manuscripts. The last example below, fordécsid, is not a borrowing in the normal 
sense but a calque or loan translation, where the Greek components π and σκοπος have been 
literally translated by the Irish components for-  and décsid7.  
                                                           
7 From O’Mulchonry’s Glossary, an Irish etymologicon which has been dated to before the mid‐eighth century 
and contains almost 200 citations of Greek words. 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
9 
 
9
 
Irish, Old Irish 
English 
Welsh 
Spanish 
Hebrew 
Greek 
óinmhid < óinmit 
fool 
ynfyd 
 
 
 
nós 
custom 
naws 
 
 
 
murúch < 
muirmorú 
mermaid 
morforwyn 
 
 
 
réal 
sixpence 
 
real 
 
 
seiceal <  cicle 
shekel 
 
 
sheqel 
 
dia‐ < día‐ 
dia‐ 
 
 
 
δια‐  
eo‐ < eó 
eu‐ 
 
 
 
ε  
deichniúr,   decaid 
decade (set of ten 
psalms) 
 
 
 
δεκάς  
onagri 
wild ass, onager  
 
 
 
ναγρος  
fordécsid  
overseer 
 
 
 
πσκοπος 
 
Loanwords from English 
It would appear that the borrowing activity outlined above did not unduly disturb the integrity of the 
language. This was not to be the case with the influence of English, however. By far the greatest 
amount of loanwords in Irish came from or via English. There was some overlap with the period of 
Norman influence during the 12th-14th centuries, when some words were borrowed from French and 
some from French via English. With the decline of French influence in the 15th century, the influx of 
loanwords from English into Irish became the norm and has remained so ever since.   
 
Perusal of early English loanwords reveals types of words which may be roughly grouped as follows:  
• 
Eating & drinking  
béile (meal), branda (brandy), bríbhéir (brewer), bricfeasta (breakfast), cabáiste (cabbage), 
candaí (candy), cearbhas, carbuaid (caraway), dinnéar8 (dinner), leitís (lettuce), liocras 
(liquorice), liomóin (lemon), luáiste (lovage), sáiste (sage), scailliún (scallion), siocaire 
(chicory), sinséar (ginger), suipéar9 (supper) 
• 
Clothing & furnishings 
bríste (breeches), clóca (cloak), cóta (coat), cufa (cuff), cuilt (quilt), cuirtín (curtain), cúisín 
(cushion), hata (hat), húda (hood), lása (lace), líneáil (lining), ómra (amber), pota (pot), scarfa 
(scarf), sciorta (skirt), stoca (stocking) 
• 
Home & hardware 
bosca (box), bríce (brick), cairt (cart), campa (camp), cárta (quart, card), cíle (keel), cistin 
(kitchen), clós (close, yard), corda (cord, rope), hanla (handle), hinse (hinge), laitís (lattice), 
lampa (lamp), rópa (rope), scafall (scaffolding) 
                                                           
8 Or perhaps from French 
9 Or perhaps from French 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
10 
 
10
• 
Personal needs  
compord (comfort), crampa (cramp), dochtúir (doctor), poitigéir (apothecary), scóip (scope), 
seirbhís (service), sólás (solace) 
• 
Commerce  
costas (cost), dosaen (dozen), lasta (last, cargo), léas (lease), liosta (list), lóistín (lodging), 
pingin (penny), scór (score), sórt (sort) 
   
The continuum of English influence 
This aspect is a subject of focus in its own right and I will not attempt to deal with it here. Let it just 
suffice to say that since the beginning of the seventeenth century, English has increasingly become 
the dominant language and, for the majority of the population, the only real language of everyday 
communication. There are no monoglot Irish speakers left and the speech of those for whom Irish is 
the mother-tongue is being noticably influenced by English, not only in vocabulary but also in syntax.   
 
Laying the foundation for domain gain 
With the foundation of the Irish Free State in 1922, the Government set about putting in place 
measures to preserve and restore Irish as the language of the Irish people. This included introducing 
Irish as the medium of education in primary schools, providing Irish-medium secondary education in 
some schools and some third-level Irish-medium education. This focus on Irish-medium education 
necessitated terminology planning, which in turn led to the formulation of recognized methodologies 
for term formation. 
  
Much activity focussed on standardization of spelling and grammar during the 1940s and 50s, on 
lexicography and terminology work, on provision of textbooks, atlases, and educational aids. Bilingual 
signage for place-names was introduced, an Irish-medium radio was founded in 1972 and a television 
station in 1996, while some newsprint has been available in Irish since the late nineteenth century. 
The recent Official Languages Act 2003 demands the provision of bilingual services by public bodies 
and, in January 2007, Irish achieved full status as an official working language of the European Union. 
All of these activities and many others have led to a huge and growing demand for technical 
terminology.    
 
General approaches to terminology provision 
There are four simple approaches involved:  
• 
Collection of existing terminology in surviving domains; 
• 
Collection of previously existing terminology forgotten by the language community due to 
domain loss; 
• 
Term formation; 
• 
Standardization and harmonization of existing terminology; 
• 
Dissemination of terminology in suitable and accessible resources. 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
11 
 
11
 
 Approaches to term formation 
• 
Devising new terms using native words or parts of words; 
• 
Calques; 
• 
Loanwords transcribed; 
• 
Loanwords left unchanged. 
 
Early transcription patterns 
While resorting to borrowing loanwords from English was not promoted as the primary method of term 
formation, it was considered necessary for scientific and technical terminology. Thus, rules for 
transcription of technical terms were devised. Special emphasis was laid on the etymology of 
loanwords, on identifying Latin or Greek roots, and on transcribing them according to the demands of 
Irish orthography.     
Features of historical loanwords from Latin were identified as follows:   
• 
the Latin endings –um, -us, -is, -io are dropped; 
• 
the vowel sounds are kept long or short as in the original Latin or Greek; 
• 
the consonants are kept broad or slender as in Irish orthography 
• 
short final vowel syllables are rendered as a or e depending on whether preceding vowel is 
broad or slender. 
 
Mod.Ir.  
 
Mid.or Early Mod.Ir. 
 
Latin  
criostal   
 
< cristall (8th C)   
 
< crystallum  
airgead  
 
< argat (9th C)  
  
< argentum  
ciogal   
 
< cicul (9th C) 
 
  
< cyclus  
maighnéad   
 
< maignéit (10th C) 
  
< magnetum  
stoidiaca  
 
< stodiace (15th C) 
  
< zodiacus  
éiclips   
 
< éiclips (17th C) 
  
 
< eclipsis  
 
Devising transcription rules 
The first step in devising transcription rules is to identify criteria in order to establish which terms to 
transcribe. While this is not an exact science, the following criteria were adopted by terminology 
planners for the Irish language:  
◦ 
Proper names  
x people (in general, Irish people and people famous in history and legend)     
x places (in general, important foreign placenames) 
x movements (historical, political, artistic) 
x organizations (administrative, historical, political, artistic)  
x titles (historical, administrative, ecclesiastical, military) 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
12 
 
12
x acronyms (some already established, but tend to leave many acronyms in 
English) 
◦ 
Terms  
x technical 
x scientific  
x other terms if no satisfactory solution can be found using native words, or if 
the borrowing is in common use in the language community 
    
Loanwords left unchanged in Irish include many proper names (for practical reasons),  acronyms (for 
reasons of transparency) and certain types of terms (e.g., some French culinary terms).  
 
Transcription rules from the Latin alphabet to Irish 
The rules are somewhat complex but these are the main steps: 
Loanwords are transcribed  syllable by syllable. The first step is to study the etymology for semantic 
purposes, and check the Greek, Latin or other roots for vowel length. The rules  provide for 
consonants which do not exist in Irish or which only appear in certain positions. They also provide for 
diphthongs which do not exist in Irish. They indicate how and when to slenderize or broaden 
consonants when putting the syllables together. Common scientific endings have been standardized. 
Finally, the rules provide for application of lenition10 and hyphenation rules in transcribed loanwords. 
 
Almost all new terms are presented to us in English and in the Roman alphabet. These rules have 
been developed over the past number of decades and applied with varying degrees of consistency. 
Much existing terminology has recently been been collected in a national terminology database, 
resulting in a huge harmonization task. Because of the lack of visibility and everyday currency of 
terms, especially technical terms, there is no real sense of what is ‘commonly in use’, with the result 
that making harmonization decisions can be quite challenging.   
 
Challenges in term formation 
As mentioned above, there is very little visibility for technical terminology in Irish. While bilingual 
signage is becoming more common, the wording is not always technical, or is at least limited by the 
scope of the signage. Although newspapers, magazines and journals exist, they do not enjoy a wide 
readership so that the awareness of members of the public concerning spelling, grammar and 
terminology is often limited to what they remember from their schooldays. Among the community 
where Irish is the mother-tongue, many speakers are not interested and use English terms in 
preference to what they consider artificial words from Dublin. Historically, there has been little 
engagement by universities in the fields of  terminology and lexicography, although this is beginning 
to change. The transcription rules are complicated and were applied and understood by language 
experts in the fields of lexicography and terminology. For reasons of resources, the rules had not 
                                                           
10 This linguistic feature is very common in Irish in many grammatical situations. It consists of softening a 
consonant (initial or otherwise) and is indicated by inserting the letter h after the consonant.    
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
13 
 
13
been finalized or published. However, due to a burgeoning translation industry in recent times, the 
need to clarify the rules and publish a handbook has become pressing. The handbook is in 
development and will be published in 2008.    
 
Relevance of this model 
It will be obvious that the approach to term formation and transcription of loanwords outlined above 
grew out of the specific circumstances of one language community. These circumstances may seem 
entirely alien in comparison to those of vigorous languages, Irish being at a very advanced state of 
decline. But since it is one of the oldest written European languages, it surely merits concerted efforts 
to secure its passage to a new generation of speakers.  
 
 
 
Fidelma Ní Ghallchobhair  
Secretary of the Terminology Committee for the Irish language  
President of the EAFT 
Representative of Ireland at the ISO Technical Committee (TC 37) 
on terminology and other language content resources. 
