SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/8th%20Conference/HeLaTerm2011_Call-for-Papers_EN.pdf

ELETO 
ΕΛΛΗΝΙΚΗ ΕΤΑΙΡΕΙΑ ΟΡΟΛΟΓΙΑΣ 
HELLENIC SOCIETY FOR TERMINOLOGY 
SOCIÉTÉ HELLÉNIQUE DE TERMINOLOGIE 
 
 
8th Conference  
“Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
10-12 November, 2011 – Athens, GREECE 
Call for papers 
The Hellenic Society for Terminology (ELETO) in cooperation with the University of Athens (UOA), the 
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki (AUTH), the University of Cyprus, the Technical Chamber of Greece 
(TCG), the Organization for the Promotion of the Hellenic Language and other organizations, which will be 
announced on the relevant web page, organize the 8th Conference “Hellenic Language and 
Terminology”. The conference will be held in Athens, Greece, on 10-12 November 2011. 
The aim of the Conference is to present the current situation of the Greek language from a terminological 
point of view, as well as methods, practices and tools of Terminology science, and their application in the 
Greek language environment – monolingual and/or interlingual –, with a view to promote terminological 
research and contribute to the present-day terminological enrichment of the Greek language. 
Themes of the Conference: 
1. 
Linguistic-ontological principles of terminology (terminology and knowledge, naming principles and methods, etc.) 
2. 
Didactics and terminology 
3. 
Terminology in specific subject fields – Lexicographical and terminographical studies – Synchronic and diachronic 
aspects 
4. 
Terminological resources (special monolingual or multilingual dictionaries, term collections, special corpora) – New 
technologies and terminology 
5. 
Standardization of terminology (internationalization of concepts, and interlingual standardization and equivalence of 
terms, terminology proposals) 
6. 
Terminology and translation 
7. 
Dissemination and use of terms – Terminology policies and regulation 
8. 
Activities of organizations and bodies for terminology 
Languages: 
Official languages of the Conference will be Greek, English and French. 
Critical dates: 
Submission of abstracts by  
15 March 2011 
Approval of abstracts by  
10 April 2011 
Submission of full papers by  
15 June 2011 
Abstracts and papers: 
Participants wishing to present a paper at the Conference are invited to submit an abstract in two electronic 
copies, as .doc files compatible with MS Office 2000. The abstract should be written in one of the official 
languages of the Conference and should neither be less than 200 words nor exceed 300 words.  
The following items must appear on the page of one copy of the abstract: 
a) title, place and dates of the Conference: 8th Conference “Hellenic Language and Terminology”, 
Athens, Greece, 10-12 November, 2011 
b) title of the paper  
c) the themes (see above) the paper comes under and 
d) name, title/profession, full address, tel. no / fax no, and e-mail address of the author(s). 
On the other copy only a), b) and c) should be written. 
The two files should be sent by e-mail, as attached files, to: valeonti@otenet.gr.  
Following the examination of the abstracts by the Scientific Committee of the Conference, the authors of the 
selected papers will receive the necessary information for the preparation of the full texts of their papers. 
 
Information: 
Conference Secretariat: tel. +30 210 9323243, +30 6977529164, e-mail: pinelpap@otenet.gr 
Organizing Committee: tel. +30 6974321009, e-mail: valeonti@otenet.gr 
Website: http://www.eleto.gr/en/Conference08.htm 
E 
Λ
Ε  Τ  Ο 
L
E
