SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/12th%20Conference/Papers-and-speakers/12th_17-08-04_DoikasSpyros_Paper2_V03.pdf

ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
245 
17    Rev(i|er)sing the LSJ 
  
Spiros Doikas 
ABSTRACT 
Liddell-Scott-Jones (LSJ) is a standard lexicographical work of the Ancient Greek language available 
online in a number of different incarnations. Its directionality is from Ancient Greek to English. What if 
one wants to search from English to Ancient Greek? The Perseus Project, a seminal and authoritative 
electronic source, provides a functionality whereby a reverse search is possible, based on a simple 
term-to-translation(s) logic, devoid of any further processing.  
The above approach is a far cry from being satisfactory and is susceptible to a number of pitfalls. This 
paper aims to explore these pitfalls and provide a framework for their remediation on a linguistic and 
computational level. Some of the types of issues identified: 
1. 
Missing term elements (“commander of a” for “τελάρχης”) 
2. 
Missing Greek-derived equivalents (no “cephalalgia” in “κεφαλαλγία” and no “pankration” in 
“παγκράτιον”) 
3. 
Use of Greek as part of the translation (for example “παρανυμφεύω” rendered as “act as 
παράνυμφος”) 
4. 
Use of anaphora (“σκοτωματικός” as “causing dizziness | suffering from it”) 
5. 
Use of Latin instead of English, especially for taboo words (“crepitus ventris” for “ἔριθος”) 
6. 
Use of old English (“shew” instead of “show”, “connexion” instead of “connection”) 
7. 
Use of dash inbetween words ( “to-morrow”) 
8. 
Abbreviated forms of the headword in phrases resulting in inflectional ambiguity (“κλυτὰ δ. 
βένθεσι λίμνης”) 
9. 
Incomplete example phrases with mid-phrase ellipsis (“τὸ ὕδωρ… αὐ. μὲν οὔκ ἐστι”) 
10. Typos and linguistic errors (“ἐντονία” instead of “εὐτονία”) 
A script was created to extract the term/translation equivalents from the xml file. Phase I consisted of a) 
analysis of the output in Ancient Greek to English format b) identification and categorization of the 
issues and c) a plan for their remediation. Phase II was an analysis and further revision of the reversed 
material. Phase III was preparation and publication of the output in wiki format as an interactive 
supplemental resource to LSJ proper. 
Επιμέλεια και αντιστροφή του LSJ 
Σπύρος ∆όικας 
ΠΕΡΙΛΗΨΗ 
Το Liddell-Scott-Jones (LSJ) είναι ένα λεξικογραφικό έργο-ορόσημο της αρχαίας ελληνικής γλώσσας το 
οποίο διατίθεται στο ∆ιαδίκτυο σε πολυάριθμες διαφορετικές υλοποιήσεις. Η κατεύθυνσή του είναι από 
τα αρχαία ελληνικά στα αγγλικά. Αν όμως κάποιος θέλει να πραγματοποιήσει αναζήτηση από τα αγγλικά 
στα αρχαία ελληνικά τι επιλογές έχει; Το Perseus, μια σημαντική και έγκυρη ηλεκτρονική πηγή, παρέχει 
μια λειτουργικότητα με την οποία είναι δυνατή η αντίστροφη αναζήτηση, με βάση μια απλή λογική 
αντίστροφης παράθεσης των αποδοθέντων όρων, χωρίς όμως περαιτέρω επεξεργασία. 
Η παραπάνω προσέγγιση πόρρω απέχει από το να είναι ικανοποιητική και υποπίπτει σε πολυάριθμες 
παγίδες τις οποίες έχει ως στόχο να διερευνήσει η παρούσα εργασία, καθώς επίσης να παράσχει ένα 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
246 
πλαίσιο για την αποκατάστασή τους σε γλωσσικό και υπολογιστικό επίπεδο. Μερικές από τις κατηγορίες 
ορολογικών ζητημάτων που εντοπίστηκαν: 
1. 
Οροστοιχεία που λείπουν («commander of a» για το «τελάρχης») 
2. 
Μη παράθεση ελληνικών ισοδύναμων (δεν υπάρχουν οι αποδόσεις «acatalepsy, anodynia, 
cephalalgia, Eteocretans, hubris, otalgia, pankration, philhellene, rhapsodist, strigil» για τα 
«ἀκαταληψία, ἀνωδυνία, κεφαλαλγία, Ἐτεόκρητες, ὕβρις, ὠταλγία, παγκράτιον, φιλέλλην, 
ῥαψῳδός, στλεγγίς» αντίστοιχα) 
3. 
Χρήση της ελληνικής ως μέρος της απόδοσης του όρου ( «act as παράνυμφος» για το 
«παρανυμφεύω», «κώθων-maker» για το «κωθωνοποιός», «πρόεδρος-designate» για το 
«μελλοπρόεδρος», «γάρον mixed with wine» για το «οἰνόγαρον», «from Θῆβαι» για το 
«Θήβηθε») 
4. 
Χρήση αναφοράς (το «σκοτωματικός» αποδίδεται «causing dizziness | suffering from it») 
5. 
Χρήση λατινικών όρων αντί για αγγλικών, ιδίως για λέξεις-ταμπού: «crepitus ventris» για το 
«ἔριθος» αντί για «flatulence» ή «fart»· «membrum virile» αντί για «penis» για τα «πέος, 
φαλλός, σαύρα, κέρκος, σχοινίον, κορύνη, ἀνδρεῖον, πόσθη, φλέψ, ψωλή, κωλῆ, πάσσαλος»· 
«pudenda muliebria» ή «pudendum muliebre» αντί για «vagina» για τα «κέλης, κῆπος, κόκκος, 
κτείς, κύσθος, λειμών, Μηριόνης, πεδίον, ῥόδον, σαβαρίχις, σάκανδρος, σάραβος, σῦκον, 
ταῦρος, τρῆμα, ὕειον, ὕσσακος, χοῖρος». 
6. 
Χρήση παλαιών Αγγλικών («shew» αντί για «show», «connexion» αντί για «connection») 
7. 
Χρήση παύλας μεταξύ λέξεων («to-morrow») 
8. 
Συντομευμένες μορφές του λήμματος σε φράσεις με αποτέλεσμα μορφολογική ασάφεια  
(«κλυτὰ δ. βένθεσι λίμνης» στο λήμμα «δῶμα» όπου το «δ.» είναι συντομογραφία του 
«δώματα») 
9. 
Παραδειγματικές φράσεις με ελλιπή στοιχεία αναφερόμενα μέσω αποσιωπητικών στο μέσον 
(«τὸ ὕδωρ… αὐ. μὲν οὔκ ἐστι») 
10. Τυπογραφικά και γλωσσολογικά σφάλματα («incilement» αντί για «incitement»· «ἐντονία» αντί 
για «εὐτονία») 
∆ημιουργήθηκε μια δέσμη ενεργειών για την εξαγωγή των ισοδύναμων όρων/αποδόσεων από το αρχείο 
xml. Η πρώτη φάση περιελάμβανε α) ανάλυση του λημματολογίου στην πρωτογενή μορφή από αρχαία 
ελληνικά προς αγγλικά β) ταυτοποίηση και κατηγοριοποίηση των ορολογικών ζητημάτων και γ) σχέδιο 
βελτιστοποίησης. Η δεύτερη φάση ενείχε μια ανάλυση και περαιτέρω αναθεώρηση του λημματολογίου 
στην ανεστραμμένη μορφή του (από αγγλικά προς αρχαία ελληνικά). Η τρίτη φάση ήταν η προετοιμασία 
για τη δημοσίευση του λημματολογίου σε μορφή βίκι ως διαδραστικός συμπληρωματικός πόρος για το 
LSJ. 
 
 
 
 
0   Introduction 
Liddell-Scott-Jones (LSJ) is a standard lexicographical work of the Ancient Greek language 
available online in several different incarnations. Its directionality is from Ancient Greek to 
English. However, there are not many satisfactory options when one wants to search from 
English to Ancient Greek. The Perseus Project, a seminal and authoritative electronic 
source, provides a functionality whereby a reverse search is possible, based on a simple 
term-to-translation(s) logic, devoid of any further processing.  
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
247 
The above approach is a far cry from being satisfactory and is subject to numerous pitfalls 
which this paper aims to explore and provide a framework for their remediation on a 
linguistic and computational level.  
In order to create a list of entries for reversal, a script was created to extract the 
term/translation equivalents from the LSJ xml file in a two-column tab-delimited format. 
Phase I consisted of a) analysis of the output in Ancient Greek to English format b) 
identification and categorization of the issues and c) a plan for their remediation. Phase II 
was an analysis and further revision and enrichment of the reversed material with other 
resources. Phase III was preparation and publication of the output in wiki format as an 
interactive supplemental resource to LSJ proper on lsj.gr1, a dedicated Ancient Greek and 
Latin wiki with multilingual coverage of Ancient Greek (English, Spanish, German, French, 
Dutch, Russian). 
Due to the size limitations of this paper, the focus will be on the issues identified in the 
process of reversal and revision. 
1.0   Types of issues identified 
The automatic reversal of the list of entries highlighted the following issues: 
1. 
Missing term elements 
o 
Missing verb in phrasal verbs or noun in compound terms 
2. 
Use of Greek as part of the translation 
3. 
Use of anaphora 
4. 
Use of Latin instead of English 
o 
Use of Latin in taboo words and expressions 
5. 
Missing Greek-derived equivalents 
6. 
Missing Latin-derived terms 
7. 
Abbreviated forms 
o 
Abbreviated forms of the headword in phrases resulting in inflectional 
ambiguity 
o 
Adverbs in abbreviated form 
o 
Incomplete example phrases with mid-phrase ellipsis 
o 
Incomplete example phrases without translation 
8. 
Use of antonyms 
9. 
Use of old English  
o 
Erroneous or old English use of dash  
10. Missing translations 
                                                 
1  
A paper by the same author (in Greek), published at the 9
th conference “Hellenic Language and 
Terminology” (2013), outlying the wikification of the LSJ can be accessed at 
http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/9th%20Conference/Papers-and-speakers/9th_23-05-
01_DoikasSpyros_Paper_V05.pdf 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
248 
11. Typos and linguistic errors 
o 
Latin binomials with both compounds in capitals 
o 
Missing dash 
o 
Use of Beta Code instead of polytonic Greek 
o 
Linguistic errors 
The issues will be discussed in the subsections that follow. 
1.1   Missing term elements 
As one can see in the image below in the Perseus reverse search2, there are term elements 
missing. 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Search results for the word “command” in Perseus 
 
For example, if we click on the LSJ link next to “τετραφαλαγγάρχης” we will see the Ancient 
Greek to English lemma of the LSJ which might give as a clue as for why this happens. 
                                                 
2  
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/definitionlookup?type=begin&q=command&target=greek 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
249 
If one looks carefully at the English text that is presented as a translation of the term in the 
English to Ancient Greek search, a part of it is italicized in LSJ proper and another part is in 
Greek, hyperlinked and non-italicized (“commander of a τετραφαλαγγία”). Perseus, in order 
to produce the reverse search output, uses the part of the entry that is italicized; hence the 
term clipping. 
 
Figure 2   τετραφαλαγγάρχης in Perseus LSJ 
 
Even after the improvement of the extraction script to include the non-italicized part, we 
have a mixed language output for term translations which is not acceptable in a bilingual 
dictionary (“commander of a τετραφαλαγγία” instead of “commander of a corps of four 
phalanxes”). See further down “Use of Greek as part of the translation”. 
1.1.1 Missing verb in phrasal verbs or noun in compound terms 
Another subcase of missing term element is missing the verb in some of the translations due 
to the “economical” layout of the original (print) dictionary. For example, for the entry 
“ἀνεπηρέαστος” the translation is “free from injury or insult”. What is extracted by the script 
is “free from injury | insult”; therefore, instead of “free from injury | free from insult”. 
ἀκτήμων 
without property | poor | in 
ἀμφικυλίνδω 
roll about | round | on 
ἀναντλέω 
draw up | out  
ἀνεπηρέαστος 
free from injury | insult  
ἀπομηρύομαι 
draw up from | out of 
ἀποτρέχω 
run off | away  
διαίσσω 
rush | dart through | across 
ἐγκαταμίγνυμαι 
be mixed in | with 
ἐγκοιμάομαι 
sleep in | sleep upon | after 
ἐγκοιτέω 
sleep in | on 
εἰσθέω 
run into | in | runs up | run up 
εἰσθρώσκω 
leap into | in 
ἐκπίνω 
drink out | off  
ἐννυχεύω 
sleep in | on | to sleep in | sink 
ἐντρίβω 
rub in | crumble | into  
ἐπειστρέχω 
run in upon | after 
ἐπίφθονος 
liable to envy | jealousy  
εὐνῆθεν 
from | out of bed 
κρήνηθεν 
from a well | spring 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
250 
μακροδρόμος 
running long | far 
ναυπρύτανις 
ruling ships | the sea 
ὁμόπολις 
from | of the same city | state 
ὁμοτροχάω 
run in company | together 
παραρρέγχω 
snore beside | near 
παραρριγόω 
freeze beside | near 
παρυπνόω 
sleep by | with 
περιθρύπτω 
rub | pound in pieces 
ποντόθεν 
from | out of the sea 
προσκαθεύδω 
sleep by | near 
προστρέχω 
run to | towards  
συγκατακαλύπτω 
wrap up with | in 
συμβρέμω 
roar along with | together 
ὑπομειδιάω 
smile a little | gently 
ὠτειλῆθεν 
from | out of the wound 
 
1.2   Use of Greek as part of the translation  
As described above, an extremely high number of translations use Greek as part of the 
term. This is cumbersome as the user would have to look up the Greek part of the term too.  
A typical example is “τερατογραφέω” which is translated as “write of τέρατα”. If we look it up 
in other dictionaries of the same era, like for example James Donogan’s, A New Greek and 
English Lexicon (1840)3, we see that not only there is no Greek in the translation but we also 
have multiple suggestions: “To describe, or relate wonderful, or preternatural occurrences; 
to describe prodigies, portentous appearances, or miracles ; to discourse, or write 
concerning, such subjects.” 
It is also worth noting Franco Montanari's, The Brill Dictionary of Ancient Greek (2015), 
which, not only uses contemporary English, but examples of use are also translated. And of 
course, it is not beset by LSJ’s idiosyncrasy of using Greek as part of the translation, i.e. in 
LSJ we get “like ἀβυρτάκη” for “ἀβυρτακώδης”, whereas in Brill we get “like spicy sauce”4. 
This approach, taken to the extreme, results in the linguistically unappealing formation of 
hyphenated chimeric compounds (“half-κάδος”, “πρόεδρος-designate”, “κώθων-maker”, 
“μάννα-like”). The way to remedy this issue is to provide full translations for all such entries 
(about 3.000). 
                                                 
3  
https://archive.org/details/newgreekenglishl00donnuoft 
4  https://brill.com/fileasset/downloads_products/34732_Preview.pdf (page 11) 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
251 
ἀγελαστέω 
be ἀγέλαστος 
ἀθλοθεσία 
office of ἀθλοθέτης 
Ἀμφιαράϊον 
sanctuary of Ἀμφιάραος 
ἀρχιφυλακέω 
hold office of ἀρχιφύλαξ 
διαπαγκρατιάζω 
contend in the παγκράτιον 
διλοχίτης 
commander of a διλοχία 
ἐπαγκυλίζομαι 
be fitted with an ἀγκύλη 
ἡμικάδιον 
half-κάδος 
Θήβηθε 
from Θῆβαι 
καρυκοειδής 
like καρύκη 
κοτυλιαῖος 
holding a κοτύλη 
κωθωνοποιός 
κώθων-maker 
κωμαρχέω 
be a κωμάρχης | administer as κωμάρχης 
λικνίτης 
of the λίκνον 
μελλοπρόεδρος 
πρόεδρος-designate 
ναρθηκώδης 
like a νάρθηξ 
οἰνόγαρον 
γάρον mixed with wine 
πρατορεύω 
act as πράτωρ 
σῦκον Αἰγύπτιον 
the fruit of the κερωνία (instead of “carob” 
or “locust bean”) 
συνεφηβεύω 
serve as ἔφηβοι together 
σωριτικός 
of the nature of the σωρίτης 
ταῦρος 
the male αἰδοῖον 
τερατογραφέω 
write of τέρατα 
τηγανιστός 
fried in a τήγανον 
χλαινηφόρος 
wearing a χλαῖνα 
 
1.3   Use of anaphora 
Anaphora is the use of a pronoun or other linguistic unit to refer back to another word or 
phrase. While it is convenient for linguistic economy in print dictionaries, terms using it are 
not reversible as a vital term element is obscured (its antecedent or postcedent) by the 
anaphor (the pronoun referring to the term element). 
ἀγρυπνητικός 
wakeful | producing wakefulness | spell for this purpose 
αἱ ἐ. τῶν Ἄλπεων 
the difficulties of passing them (from the entry “ἐρυμνότης”) 
Ἀναγυροῦς 
Adj. Ἀναγυρ-άσιο ς, ὁ, man of this deme 
ἀποδιψάω 
cease from thirst | be relieved of it 
ἀφλέγμαντος 
free from inflammation | not liable to it  
∆ιδυμαῖος 
their temple | their festival 
Ἰσοκράτει ἀργύριον 
ἀναλίσκω 
spend money in paying him (from the entry “ἀναλίσκω”) 
σκοτωματικός 
causing dizziness | suffering from it 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
252 
 
1.4   Use of Latin instead of English 
Many entries are translated with their Latin equivalent only. 
ἀμπελοφύλαξ 
custos vineae | MISSING vineyard-keeper 
ἐξαίνυμαι 
ἐξαίνυτο θυμόν = animam eripuit (instead of “took away 
breath, took away life, killed”) 
καταφιμόω 
conticisco 
καυκαλίς 
Tordylium apulum | MISSING Mediterranean hartwort 
κούστωρ 
custos | MISSING guard, watch, preserver, keeper, overseer, 
protector, defender, attendant 
λαβδοειδής 
ὀστοῦν λαβδοειδές = os hyoïdes (strangely, a French term is 
used here instead of the Latin “os hyoideum”) | MISSING 
hyoid bone 
εὐαντόλως5 
correpte 
ἀναλίσκω6 
λόγῳ ἀ. τὸν χρόνον τῆς ἡμέρας = diem eximere dicendo 
πυλουρός 
custos 
σαγάπηνον 
Ferula persica | MISSING sagapenum 
 
1.4.1   Use of Latin in taboo words and expressions 
This is a phenomenon which is widespread in the Ancient Greek dictionaries of the 18th and 
19th centuries. We see it also in Anatole Bailly’s Dictionnaire grec-français (1895)7, Wilhelm 
Pape’s Griechisch-Deutsches Handwörterbuch (1842)8 as well as Dvoretsky’s Ancient 
Greek to Russian dictionary (1958) [И. Х. Дворецкий, Древнегреческо-русский]9. 
 
εὐρύπρωκτος, χαυνόπρωκτος 
wide-breeched | pathicus (instead of 
“catamite, sodomite, person who submits to 
anal sex, passive male partner in anal 
intercourse, passive homosexual, brownie 
queen, browning queen, passive partner”) 
πορδή 
crepitus ventris (instead of “flatulence” or 
“fart”) 
                                                 
5  
https://www.translatum.gr/forum/index.php?topic=575947.0 
6  
https://www.translatum.gr/forum/index.php?topic=578597.0 
7  
https://archive.org/details/BaillyDictionnaireGrecFrancais. A study on taboo expressions in Ancient 
Greek with French translations can be found here: http://chaerephon.e-
monsite.com/pages/miscellanea/pudenda.html 
8  
https://archive.org/details/drwpapeshandwrt03bensgoog 
9  
All the above dictionaries are searchable on lsj.gr 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
253 
πέος, φαλλός, σαύρα, κέρκος, σχοινίον, 
κορύνη, ἀνδρεῖον, πόσθη, φλέψ, ψωλή, 
κωλῆ, πάσσαλος 
membrum virile (instead of “penis”) 
κέλης, κῆπος, κόκκος, κτείς, κύσθος, 
λειμών, Μηριόνης, πεδίον, ῥόδον, 
σαβαρίχις, σάκανδρος, σάραβος, 
σῦκον, ταῦρος, τρῆμα, ὕειον, ὕσσακος, 
χοῖρος 
“pudenda muliebria” or “pudendum muliebre” 
(instead of “vagina”) 
ψωλή 
membrum virile praeputio retracto (instead 
of “erect penis” or, to be precise, 
“uncircumsized penis in a state of arousal”)  
ἀποψωλέω 
praeputium retrahere alicui | verpum facere 
ἐντονία10 
distentio penis 
 
1.5   Missing Greek-derived equivalents 
There are numerous English words of Greek origin, such as medical terms or Greek cultural 
references, which are near-transcriptions of the Greek word. Many blatant and commonly 
used words are missing like “acatalepsy, anodynia, cephalalgia, hubris, Eteocretans, otalgia, 
pankration, philhellene, rhapsodist, strigil”. 
 
ἀκαταληψία 
MISSING acatalepsy | inability to comprehend | inability attain 
conviction 
ἀνθρωπολόγος 
speaking of man, i.e. fond of personal conversation  | MISSING 
anthropologist  
Ἀνθρωφηρακλῆς 
title of play by Pherecrates | MISSING Anthropheracles 
ἀνωδυνία 
freedom from pain | MISSING anodinia | MISSING anodynia 
ἀπορητικός 
dubitative | inclined to doubt | MISSING aporetic 
Βοηδρομιών 
third Attic month | MISSING Boedromion 
γαστραφέτης 
stomach-bow | MISSING gastraphetes 
ἑταίρα 
MISSING hetaira | MISSING hetaera 
Ἐτεόκρητες 
true Cretans | MISSING Eteocretans 
ἐφεκτικός 
MISSING ephectic 
ζητητικός 
MISSING zetetic 
Κενταυρομαχία 
battle of Centaurs | MISSING Centauromachy 
κεφαλαλγία 
head-ache | MISSING cephalalgia 
ὀμφάκιον 
juice of unripe grapes | oil made from unripe olives | MISSING 
omphacium 
ὀψιμαθής 
late in learning, late to learn | MISSING opsimath 
ὀψιμαθία 
late-gotten learning | MISSING opsimathy 
παγκράτιον 
all-in contest in boxing and wrestling | MISSING pankration 
                                                 
10 https://www.translatum.gr/forum/index.php?topic=577708.0 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
254 
ῥαψῳδός 
reciter of Epic poems | MISSING rhapsodist 
στλεγγίς  
MISSING strigil 
τριχίασις 
MISSING trichiasis  
ὕβρις 
MISSING hubris 
φαλλοφόρος 
bearing a phallus | MISSING phallophorus | MISSING 
phallophoros 
φαρμακοποιΐα 
preparation of drugs | MISSING pharmacopoeia 
φιλέλλην 
fond of the Hellenes | MISSING philhellene 
ὠταλγία 
earache | MISSING otalgia 
 
1.6   Missing Latin-derived terms 
Often, terms of Latin origin which are perfectly acceptable and in current usage, are not 
used as translations. 
ἀγκύλη 
MISSING amentum 
βρεφοκτόνος, παιδολέτωρ, τεκνοφόνος, 
ὠλεσίτεκνος 
MISSING infanticide | child-
murdering 
παιδοκτονία, τεκνοκτονία 
MISSING infanticide | child-
murder 
παιδοκτόνος 
MISSING filicide 
 
1.7   Abbreviated forms 
Print dictionaries tend to use all sorts of abbreviated forms in order to save space. However, 
the result is not only less transparency but also lexical and inflectional ambiguity, especially 
with such highly inflectional languages as Ancient Greek. 
1.7.1   Abbreviated forms of the headword in phrases resulting in inflectional 
ambiguity 
ἀγκύλη 
ἀ. χρυσόστροφοι (instead of “ἀγκύλαι χρυσόστροφοι”) 
ἀλκυόνειος 
of the ἀλκυών, ἀ. ἡμέραι (which could be “ἁλκυόνειοι ἡμέραι” or 
“ἀλκυονίδες ἡμέραι”) 
βασιλεύς 
β. τῶν ἱερῶν = rex sacrorum (instead of “βασιλεύς τῶν ἱερῶν”) 
δῶμα 
κλυτὰ δ. βένθεσι λίμνης (full phrase is “κλυτὰ δώματα βένθεσι λίμνης”) 
ἐχθές 
οὐ γάρ τι νῦν γε κἀ. (“κἀ.” should be “κἀχθές”) 
Μαύσσωλλος 
Μαυσωλεῖον = tomb of M. (instead of “tomb of Mausolus”) 
μωρός 
μ. ἀνάγκη = blind necessity (which should be “μωρά ἀνάγκη”) 
μωρός 
τὸ μ. (this could be “τὸ μῶρον” or to “τὸ μωρόν”) 
ὑοειδής 
ὀστοῦν ὑ. the hyoid bone (instead of “ὀστοῦν ὑοειδές” or “ὑοειδές 
ὀστοῦν”) 
 
1.7.2   Adverbs in abbreviated form 
Given that adverbs are listed in an abbreviated form and no appropriate mark-up in the 
actual code, there is no easy way to extract them as additional entries. 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
255 
ἀγαπητός 
-τῶς gladly, contentedly 
γνωστός 
-τῶς clearly 
δυνατός 
-τῶς strongly 
ἐνδοιαστός 
-τῶς doubtfully 
νοητός 
-τῶς carefully 
προπετής 
-τῶς headlong, out of control 
συνετός 
-τῶς intelligently 
χαμαιπετής 
-τῶς along the ground, like a goose's flight 
χρηστός 
-τῶς well, properly 
 
1.7.3   Incomplete example phrases with mid-phrase ellipsis 
There are multiple instances of example phrases which are incomplete and the user would 
have to look up the original source in order to retrieve the full phrase. 
αὐθιγενής 
τὸ ὕδωρ… αὐ. μὲν οὔκ ἐστι = not from a natural spring 
 
1.7.4   Incomplete example phrases without translation 
Sometimes, the example phrases not only are incomplete, but also no translation is 
provided. 
αἴτιος 
τί ποτ' οὖν ἐστι τὸ αἴτιον τό… μηδένα εἰπεῖν 
 
1.8   Use of antonyms 
Antonyms are listed in a way that they are indistinguishable from translations of the term. 
 
ἀλήθεια 
truth | lie | mere appearance 
κουρότερος 
young | elder [full source text: young, opp. elder] 
ἀπανθρωπίζομαι 
become a man, beast [full source text: “become a man, opp. a 
beast”.] (Missing “ἐκθηριοῦσθαι” as a possible antonym.) 
 
1.9   Use of old English  
Given that LSJ was first published in 1819, there are many remnants of old English spelling.  
connexion 
(instead of “connection”) 
shew 
(instead of “show”) 
ἀναλίσκω 
ἀνήλωσας λόγον = hast wasted words (instead of “has”) 
Ὀλυμπιονίκης 
conqueror in the Olympic games (instead of: “Olympic winner, 
Olympian winner, Olympian, victor in the Olympic games, winner in 
the Olympic games”) 
 
1.9.1   Erroneous or old English use of dash  
For example: camel-hay, Can-daules, door-keeper, pumice-stone, rupture-wort, to-morrow. 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
256 
1.10   Missing translations 
Some terms are devoid of translation; in some cases they only provide meta-information as 
in the one below: 
μνηστηροφονία 
name of the twenty-second book of the odyssey (missing “slaughter 
of the suitors”; Bailly does translate as “meurtre des prétendants”) 
 
1.11   Typos and linguistic errors 
ἀγκύλη 
χρυσόστροΦοι (instead of “χρυσόστροφοι”) 
ἄμβιξ 
spouied cup (instead of “spouted cup”) 
ἀπλεονέκτητος 
free from anarice (instead of “avarice”) 
διυφή 
woven fabrie (instead of “fabric”) 
ἐμφόρησις 
replelion (instead of “repletion”) 
ἑτέροζυξ 
(instead of “ἑτερόζυξ”) 
καταχορηγέω 
lauish as χορηγός (instead of “lavish”) 
παρόρμησις 
incilement (instead of “incitement”) 
πέος 
membrum uirile (instead of “virile”) 
ῥύστης 
leliverer (instead of “beliverer”) 
φιάλη 
broad, fiat bowl or saucer for drinking or pouring 
libations (“fiat” instead of “flat”) 
 
1.11.1   Latin binomials with both compounds in capitals 
In modern usage, the first letter of the first part of the name, the genus, is always capitalized 
in writing, while that of the second part is not, even when derived from a proper noun such 
as the name of a person or place11. Hence, in the entry “κυνόγλωσσος”, “Cynoglossum 
Columnae” should be spelled “Cynoglossum columnae” instead. 
1.11.2   Missing dash 
In the entry “πυριμαχέω” one can read “be fireresisting” (instead of “be fire-resisting”). 
1.11.3   Use of Beta Code instead of polytonic Greek 
In the entry “λίνος” one can read “li/nos: to\ di/ktuon” which should be “λίνος τὸ δίκτυον”. 
1.11.4   Linguistic errors 
Usage of the non-existent headword “ἐντονία” instead of “εὐτονία”. Even the text referred to 
(Horapollo 1.46) has εὐτονία (“vigor”) and not “ἐντονία”12. 
                                                 
11  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binomial_nomenclature 
12  https://www.translatum.gr/forum/index.php?topic=577708.0 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
257 
2   Conclusion 
In this brief paper I tried to breach different kinds of issues encountered in the task of 
reversing the LSJ. It quickly became apparent that a reversal was not possible without a 
thorough revision which would also affect the dictionary in its standard form. A 
categorization of the issues is helpful in managing the revision of such an extensive work. 
The aim is to publish the end result on lsj.gr as a supplemental, interactive, wikified resource 
to LSJ proper. Similar work is being carried out on other language pairs involving Ancient 
Greek (French, German, Russian).  
 
Spiros Doikas 
Founder of translatum.gr translation portal and lsj.gr classics wiki 
E-mail: translatum@translatum.gr 
 
 
