SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/9th%20Conference/9thConference-PaperEditingInstructions-EN.pdf

 
1
ΕΛΕΤΟ 
ΕΛΛΗΝΙΚΗ ΕΤΑΙΡΕΙΑ ΟΡΟΛΟΓΙΑΣ 
HELLENIC SOCIETY FOR TERMINOLOGY 
 
9th Conference “Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
7-9 November 2013, Athens GREECE 
Info: Tel. 6974321009, E-mail: valeonti@otenet.gr 
 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR EDITING AND PRESENTING THE PAPER 
 
A. Editing 
 
1 
The paper should be no more than 10 pages and no less than 8 pages long; it should 
be edited in MS WORD format (compatible with MS Office 2000), in one of the two 
languages (Greek or English) of the Conference and it should be sent by e-mail to 
valeonti@otenet.gr not later than 30 June 2013. 
 
2 
The font to be used is ARIAL 11 for the paper title, ARIAL 10 for the chapter titles, 
ARIAL 8 for the abstracts και ARIAL 9 for the remaining text, with a spacing of 0 points 
before and a spacing of 6 points after each paragraph, while the line spacing will be 
1,5. 
 
3 
The whole text will be typed in normal template. Footnotes can be used, but not 
endnotes. 
 
4 
Page setup will be as follows: 
 
Paper size: 
Α4 
Orientation: 
  Portrait 
 
Margins 
 
 
 
cm 
top 
 
2 
bottom 
 
8,5 
bottom 
 
2 
right 
 
6 
gutter 
 
0 
header 
 
1 
footer 
 
1 
 
5 
The first page should contain: 
 
a) the paper title in small letters (bold), centre aligned 
b) the name(s) of the author(s) in small letters (bold), centre aligned under the paper 
title, and separated by commas (no title or profession mentioned) 
c) the word ΠΕΡΙΛΗΨΗ/ABSTRACT in the language of the paper (Greek or English) 
d) the abstract text in the language of the paper (Greek or English) 
e) repetition of the above points a), b), c) and d) in the other official language of the 
Conference.  
 
E
Λ  
Ε  Τ Ο 
L 
E
 
2
6 
In case that the language of the paper and of the first abstract is English, and the 
author, or one of the authors, speaks Greek, the second abstract shall be in Greek, 
and approximately 2 pages long; also, a short English-Greek glossary should be 
added at the end as an Annex, containing the basic special terms of the paper. In case 
of difficulties with the equivalent Greek terms needed, the author is encouraged to 
contact ELETO for help. 
(Note that neither the abstracts nor the glossary count in the 8-10 pages required for 
the paper.) 
 
7 
The paper body should begin four spaces after the end of the second abstract or from 
a new page (2nd page).  
 
Section or paragraph headings should be in small letters (bold) and in normal 
template (not formatted as headings). 
 
8 
Page numbering (temporary) should be placed at the right top of the header on each 
page. 
 
9 
Section or paragraph numbering should follow the decimal system (if there exists an 
introduction it is given the digit 0), with the respective headings being left aligned. 
 
10 
The transcription of Greek names (conversion of Greek characters to the Latin 
alphabet) should be conformant to the Greek Standard ELOT 743 (equivalent to the 
International Standard ISO 843). 
 
11 
Bibliographic references should use numbers in brackets [ ], while bibliography, as a 
numbered list, should feature at the end of the paper and contain the following 
information: author’s name and surname, book title or article title, publisher or journal 
title, year of publication, page or issue number, total number of pages. 
 
12 
At the end of the paper, the following information about the author(s) should be 
indicated: name and surname, title or profession, and postal address. 
 
13 
In case that the text contains special fonts (special characters, symbols etc.) it should 
be saved (through WORD) with fonts embedded, by selecting: Tools – Options – Save 
– Embed true type fonts. 
 
B. Presentation 
14 
The Conference will be supported by simultaneous translation between the languages 
English Ù Greek. 
15 
The presentation material of a paper (slides, tables, diagrams etc.) may be written in 
any of the two languages of the Conference. 
16 
In case that the language of the text of a paper is English, while the speaker, or one of 
the speakers, speaks Greek, his/her oral presentation should be in Greek (yet, no 
translation of the text or of the presentation material is required). 
 
C. Curriculum vitae 
17 
The paper should be accompanied by a short CV of each of the authors, in Greek 
and/or in English, not exceeding 200 words. 
 
 
3
Προβλήματα πρόσληψης της ορολογίας και θεωρίας στη μέση 
εκπαίδευση 
    
Καλλιόπη Πολυμέρου 
ΠΕΡΙΛΗΨΗ 
Η περίοδος της λυκειακής εκπαίδευσης είναι η κατάλληλη εποχή για να εισαχθούν οι μαθητές σε 
ζητήματα θεωρίας και ορολογίας. Η εμπειρική διαπίστωση ότι οι μαθητές δυσκολεύονται να 
χρησιμοποιούν και να αποκωδικοποιούν λόγο που περιέχει ορολογία φαίνεται να συνδέεται με ζητήματα 
γλωσσικά και συγκεκριμένα με τον τρόπο με τον οποίο εφαρμόζεται η γλωσσική διδασκαλία στην μέση 
ιδιαίτερα εκπαίδευση. Τα ζητήματα της γλώσσας και της διδασκαλίας της στη χώρα μας  αποτέλεσαν 
συχνά θέματα επιστημονικών αλλά και λαϊκών συζητήσεων και αντεγκλήσεων με μόνιμο ζητούμενο το 
κατά πόσον αυτή η πλούσια πολιτιστική κληρονομιά θα μας βοηθήσει να κερδίσουμε ένα πλούσιο 
γλωσσικό όργανο. Παράλληλα, η εισβολή της εικόνας και η ραγδαία ανάπτυξη της εισαγόμενης 
τεχνολογίας έχουν περιαγάγει την ορολογία σε δυνάστη, με αποτέλεσμα όλο και περισσότεροι να 
συμβιβάζονται με αμετάφραστους και αγοραίους όρους.  
Problems of understanding terminology and theory in secondary 
education 
    
Kalliopi Polymerou 
ABSTRACT 
The period of upper secondary education is the right time to introduce students to issues of theory and 
terminology. The empirical conclusion that students find it difficult to use and decode speech that 
contains terminology, seems to be connected with language matters and specifically with the way 
language teaching is applied in secondary education. The issues of language and language teaching in 
our country were often matters of both scientific and popular debates and recriminations in a permanent 
challenge whether this rich cultural heritage will help us gain a rich language. At the same time the 
invasion of picture and the rapid growth of imported technology have made terminology seem like an 
oppressor. The result is more and more students being content with untranslated terms as well as  
terms imposed by the market.    
 
 
0. Εισαγωγή 
Η παρούσα εργασία είναι προϊόν διδακτικής εμπειρίας, ιδιαίτερα από τον χώρο της δημόσιας 
μέσης εκπαίδευσης, η οποία άλλωστε και αποτελεί κατά την άποψή μου για διάφορους 
λόγους το ‘κομβικότερο’ σημείο του εκπαιδευτικού μας συστήματος, και  ιδιαίτερα το τμήμα 
εκείνο που αφορά στη λυκειακή εκπαίδευση (γενική και τεχνική). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
An example of 1st page  
