SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/6th%20Conference/6thHeLaTerm_2007_PressRelease2_EN.pdf

 
1
PRESS RELEASE 
HELLENIC SOCIETY FOR TERMINOLOGY 
UNIVERSITY OF CYPRUS 
 
 
 
 
6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, Greece, 1-3 November 2007 
Under the aegis of the President of the Hellenic Republic 
Mr. Karolos Papoulias 
The 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» was held on 1-3 November in Athens, organized by 
the Hellenic Society for Terminology (ELETO) and the University of Cyprus (UoC). Co-organizing bodies 
included the University of Athens (UoA), the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki (AUTH), the University of 
Patras (UoP), the National Technical University of Athens (NTUA), the French Institute of Athens (IFA), the 
Technical Chamber of Greece (TCG), the Institute for Language and Speech Processing (ILSP), and the 
Organization for the Internationalization of the Hellenic Language. 
The Conference was dedicated to Vasilis A. Filopoulos, core founding member 
and for many years president of ELETO, a scientific association whose objectives 
are, among others, to study, produce, process, collect, systematize, disseminate 
and develop by any means the Greek terminology, to promote terminological 
research, to contribute to the continuous and symmetric development of the Greek 
language, and to promote its fundamental role both as a source and as a tool for 
the international terminological background. 
The Opening Session was held in the Ceremony Hall of the UoA, on Thursday, 1st 
November 2007, at 19:00. Prof. Panagiotis Kontos, UoA representative in the 
Organizing Committee, welcomed the Conference participants and guests on 
behalf of the Rector. Mr. Kostas Valeontis, Chair of the Organizing Committee 
and 
President 
of 
ELETO, 
and 
Mrs. Marianne Katsoyannou, Chair of 
the Scientific Commitee and UoC 
Professor followed with introductory 
speeches, and addresses on behalf of 
administrations and representatives of the co-organizing bodies were 
made by: Mrs. Anna Anastasiadis-Simeonidis, AUTH Professor; 
Mr. Andreas 
Andreopoulos, 
NTUA 
Professor; 
Mrs. Anna 
Iordanidou, UoP Professor; Mr. Paul Petit, Attaché for Educational 
Cooperation of the French Embassy (IFA); Mr. Giannis Alavanos, 
President of the TCG; Mr. Nikos Glaros, ILSP Researcher; and 
Mr. Constantinos Karkanias, President of the Organization for the 
Internationalization of the Hellenic Language. 
After the President of ELETO declared the Conference open, 
Emeritus Professor of NTUA Mr. Theodossis P. Tassios, in his 
speech entitled «Vital Memory of Vasilis Filopoulos», moved the 
audience with his grasping account, discussing the highlights of the 
long contribution of Vasilis Filopoulos in the technical and scientific 
developments in Greece, and concluding in emphasis that Vasilis 
Filopoulos still is and will always be present through the durable 
impact of his works. 
The evening ended with a cocktail, hosted for the Conference 
participants and guests in the impressive «Kostis Palamas» building. 
 
 
The main part of the Conference was held in the IFA Auditorium and lasted two days (Friday 2nd and Saturday 
3rd November 2007). Before sessions started, the Cultural Attaché of the French Embassy, and Director of the 
IFA, Mr. Alain Fohr, welcomed the Conference audience. 
The Conference programme was divided in seven sessions dedicated to the following topics: Linguistic-
ontological principles of Terminology, Terminology policy, Didactics and Terminology, Terminology in specific 
subject fields, Lexicographical and terminographical studies, Terminological resources, Standardization of 
Terminology, Terminology and Translation, Activities of organizations and bodies for Terminology.  
 
 
E 
Λ  
 Ε  Τ  Ο 
L 
E 
 
Theodossis P. Tassios 
Panagiotis Kontos 
Vasilis A. Filopoulos 
 
2
The 35 Conference papers (by 49 authors-speakers - 38 Greeks and 11 from various countries) covered both 
theoretical and practical issues including: morphemes, verbs and modes of the Greek language in composing 
single- and mutli-word terms (e.g. the morpheme “–eid(is)”; compound verbs coming from Ancient Greek); 
lexicalization of mutli-word compounds; subject field systems; terminology planning and policies in 
minority/minoritized languages; term-didactical issues through systemic approaches; historical term studies (the 
terminology about the public administration of ancient Crete, Ancient Greek-Georgian dictionary of colour 
terms); terminological research in specific subject fields including the biomedical domain (Nanomedicine, 
Anatomy, Biomedicine), Geoinformatics, Chemical Engineering, and Ecology; cooperative terminological work 
in the field of underground water pollution; socioterminological aspects and linguistic trends in term usage; 
terminological resources (including: parallel corpora studies, construction of an electronic dictionary); 
terminology and translation issues (including: the European Standard EN 15038 and its application; a 
functional-pragmatic approach of Terminology and Translation Theory; translating Western terminology into 
Japanese; translating instructions for the handling of terms); treatment of translation in EU railway sector 
legislative texts, as well as of terminology in the State General Accounting Office of Greece; and finally the 
need for a new linguistic world order in the context of multilingualism and globalization. The Conference 
proceedings have been published in an elegant volume, which was distributed to the Conference participants. 
 
At the end of the 7th and 
last 
session, 
a 
Round 
Table 
was 
held 
on 
«Principles of Terminology 
– 
Adaptation 
of 
the 
International Standards for 
the 
Greek 
language», 
during which the work of 
technical committee ΤΕΕ-
ΕLΟΤ/ΤΕ21 «Principles of 
Terminology» 
was 
presented, and especially 
the 
recently 
published 
Hellenic Standards ΕLΟΤ 
561.1 and ΕLΟΤ 561.2 , 
as well as the under 
development ΕLΟΤ 402. 
The 
discussion 
was 
moderated 
by 
Prof. 
Marianne 
Katsoyannou 
(ΤΕ21 observer), and the 
panel 
included 
ΤΕ21 
coordinatrix Mrs. Katerina 
Toraki 
and 
ΤΕ21 
members 
Mr. Kostas 
Valeontis and Mr. Ioannis 
Saridakis, as well as the representative of technical committee ΤΕ22 «Documentation» Mrs. Stella 
Chatzimari. The discussion’s impact was demonstrated by the interest and active participation of a 
considerable part of the Conference audience who stayed till the end of the Round Table, which concluded still 
another successful Terminology conference, the 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology». 
For more information on the 6th Conference, as well as for ELETO and its work, one can visit ELETO’s website 
(www.eleto.gr), and especially the webpage http://www.eleto.gr/gr/Conference06.htm, or send an e-mail to 
valeonti@otenet.gr 
 
 
 
The Round Table interlocutors, after the discussion, at the end of the Conference 
(Κ. Valeontis, Μ. Κatsoyannou, Κ. Τοraki, S. Chatzimari, I. Saridakis) 
