SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/7th%20Conference/7thHeLaTerm-2009_Call-for-Papers_EN.pdf

ELETO 
ΕΛΛΗΝΙΚΗ ΕΤΑΙΡΕΙΑ ΟΡΟΛΟΓΙΑΣ 
HELLENIC SOCIETY FOR TERMINOLOGY 
SOCIÉTÉ HELLÉNIQUE DE TERMINOLOGIE 
 
 
7th Conference  
“Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
22-24 October, 2009 – Athens, GREECE 
Call for papers 
The Hellenic Society for Terminology (ELETO) in cooperation with the University of Athens (UOA), the 
Athens University of Economics and Business (AUEB), the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki (AUTH), the 
University of Patras, the National Technical University of Athens (NTUA), the University of Cyprus, the 
Technical Chamber of Greece (TCG), the Institute for Language and Speech Processing (ILSP), the Hellenic 
Organization for Standardization (ELOT), and the Organization for the Promotion of the Hellenic Language 
organize the 7th Conference “Hellenic Language and Terminology”. The conference will be held in 
Athens, Greece, on 22-24 October 2009. 
The 7th Conference is dedicated to Aristotle, the father of Ontology and Logic, which are at the basis of the 
contemporary science of Terminology. 
The aim of the Conference is to present the current situation of the Greek language from a terminological 
point of view, as well as methods, practices and tools of Terminology science, and their application in the 
Greek language environment – monolingual and/or interlingual –, with a view to promote terminological 
research and contribute to the present-day terminological enrichment of the Greek language. 
Themes of the Conference: 
1. 
Linguistic-ontological principles of terminology (terminology and knowledge, naming principles and methods, etc.) 
2. 
Didactics and terminology 
3. 
Terminology in specific subject fields – Lexicographical and terminographical studies – Synchronic and diachronic 
aspects 
4. 
Terminological resources (special monolingual or multilingual dictionaries, term collections, special corpora) – New 
technologies and terminology 
5. 
Standardization of terminology (internationalization of concepts, and interlingual standardization and equivalence of 
terms, terminology proposals) 
6. 
Terminology and translation 
7. 
Dissemination and use of terms – Terminology policies and regulation 
8. 
Activities of organizations and bodies for terminology 
Languages: 
Official languages of the Conference will be Greek, English and French. 
Critical dates: 
Submission of abstracts by  
15 March 2009 
Approval of abstracts by  
10 April 2009 
Submission of full papers by  
15 June 2009 
Abstracts and papers: 
Participants wishing to present a paper at the Conference are invited to submit an abstract. The abstract 
should be written in one of the official languages of the Conference and should neither be less than 200 
words nor exceed 300 words. The following items must appear on the page of the abstract: 
a) 
title, place and dates of the Conference: 7th Conference “Hellenic Language and Terminology”, Athens, Greece, 
October 22-24, 2009 
b) 
title of the paper 
c) 
name, title/profession, full address, tel. no / fax no, and e-mail address of the author(s) and 
d) 
the themes (see above) the paper comes under. 
The abstract should be drafted in electronic form (MS WORD .doc format) and sent by e-mail, as an 
attached file, to: valeonti@otenet.gr.  
Following the examination of the abstracts by the Scientific Committee of the Conference, the authors of the 
selected papers will receive the necessary information for the preparation of the full texts of their papers. 
 
Information: 
Conference Secretariat: tel. +30 210 9323243, +30 6977529164, e-mail: pinelpap@otenet.gr 
Organizing Committee: tel. +30 6974321009, e-mail: valeonti@otenet.gr 
Website: http://www.eleto.gr/en/Conference07.htm 
E 
Λ
Ε  Τ  Ο 
L
E
