SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/15th Conference/Papers-and-Speakers/001_Abstract_NatalieKubler.pdf

15th Conference “Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
6–8 November 2025, Athens 
 
Translating Variation in Multi-Word Terms:  
Is the human going to stay in the loop? 
Natalie Kübler, invited speaker 
Over the past two decades, interest in variation in terminology has steadily increased (Humbley & Picton 
2017), and in the last twenty years, significant progress has been made in this field. The emergence of 
corpora in digital format, along with the development of corpus linguistics approaches, has made it possible to 
systematically observe the recurring presence of variations in texts. Moreover, terminologists, who were 
initially domain experts with a strong interest in languages, have progressively evolved into linguists and/or 
translators—specialists in language rather than experts in specific subject areas. This shift has elevated the 
role of corpora, which facilitate the extraction of specialised and contextual information about terms. 
Consequently, research has moved from controlling variation to taking it into account as a legitimate 
phenomenon that must be analysed to better understand it. 
In linguistic practice, variation constitutes a source of uncertainty for translators and technical writers (Alarcon-
Navio et al. 2016). Language professionals have to rely on terminological resources (term bases) to help them 
finding the correct equivalent and dealing correctly with term variation. However, terminological resources are 
not always (and cannot be) complete and up-to-date, especially with Multi-Word-Terms (MWT). These MWT 
are prone to variation for a wide range of reasons that will be detailed. An additional difficulty lies in the fact 
that MWT are often part of complex noun phrases (CNPs, Kübler et al. 2018), which makes it difficult for 
translators to find the correct equivalent and to process term variation. The increasing use of machine 
translation tools, whether Neural Machine Translation (NMT) or generative AI, brings back these long-standing 
questions that the translation community has faced in relation to machines (Kübler et al. 2022, Cabezas-
Garcia & Leon-Arauz, 2023). Over the last decades, much has been done to specialise machines with 
terminological resources (Semenov et al. 2023). However, MWT terms processing has received little attention 
and machines are not consistent while translating terms, especially in CNPs, thus introducing inappropriate 
variation. 
The advent of generative AI has changed the game. AI's ability to predict words, structures, etc. makes it 
possible, for example, to extract terms from a text and obtain their equivalents in another language, thereby 
processing bilingual terminology upstream of the translation process.  Thanks to prompts and Chain-of 
Thought Prompting, generative AI can produce good-looking translations, which may, however, contain 
errors.  Generative AI can also be used as a help to evaluate translated texts, but the answers can be prone 
to errors or inconsistencies. 
After a reminder of term, and especially, MWT variation, we will tackle the issue of translating term variation 
with examples in English and French. We will then address the issue of evaluating how TAN and generative AI 
translate terminological variation and Multi-Word Terms, particularly within complex noun phrases. Finally, we 
will show some possible solutions, especially on a human-in-the loop approach of Generative AI. 
 
 
References 
Alarcón-Navío, E., López-Rodríguez, C., & Tercedor-Sánchez, M. 2016. Variation dénominative et 
familiarité en tant que source d’incertitude en traduction médicale. Meta, 61(1), 117-144. 
Cabezas-García, M., & León-Araúz, P. (2023). Machine versus corpus-based translation of 
multiword terms. Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, 38(Supplement_1), i6-i16. 
Humbley, J., & Picton, A. (2017). Introduction: Multiple perspectives on terminological variation. 
In Multiple perspectives on terminological variation (pp. 1-7). John Benjamins Publishing Company. 
Kübler, N., Mestivier, A., & Pecman, M. (2022). Using comparable corpora for translating and post-
editing complex noun phrases in specialized texts. Extending the scope of corpus-based translation 
studies, p-237-266. 
Kübler, N., Mestivier, A., & Pecman, M. (2018). Teaching specialised translation through corpus 
linguistics: translation quality assessment and methodology evaluation and enhancement by 
experimental approach. Meta, 63(3), 807-825. 
Semenov, K., Zouhar, V., Kocmi, T., Zhang, D., Zhou, W., & Jiang, Y. E. (2023, December). Findings 
of the WMT 2023 Shared Task on Machine Translation with Terminologies. In Proceedings of the 
Eighth Conference on Machine Translation (pp. 663-671). 
 
 
Natalie Kübler 
Professeur UFR EILA, linguistique et traduction, Université Paris Cité 
CLILLAC-ARP devient ALTAE depuis le 1er janvier 2025 
https://clillac-arp.u-paris.fr/annuaire/kubler-natalie/ 
Projet MaTOS : https://anr-matos.github.io/ 
Co-responsable du Master Langues de Spécialité, Corpus et traductologie 
https://u-paris.fr/eila/licences-et-masters/ 
 
