SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/ELETO-EAFT_Conference_2013-11-07/ELETO-EAFT-Symposium-2013_Joseph%20Mariani_Abstract2_EN.pdf

EAFT–ELETO Symposium 
“National Languages and Terminology  
in Higher Education, Science & Technology” 
Athens, Greece, 7 November 2013 
 
 
ICT Enabling Language Diversity 
 
Joseph Mariani 
LIMSI-CNRS 
& 
Director 
Institute for Multilingual and Multimedia Information (IMMI) 
BP133, 91403 Orsay Cedex (France) 
Joseph.Mariani@limsi.fr 
 
 
Summary 
 
The issues of multilingualism 
The issues of multilingualism are twofold: 
- First, to take care of preserving cultures and languages, i.e. to allow citizens to express themselves in their 
first language. This question takes on a particular depth in the context of the construction of Europe, given 
the strong linguistic diversity within a single political entity. A study conducted for the European 
Commission shows that 90% of European citizens questioned prefer to find websites in their native language 
rather than in a foreign language. One can also note that currently it is estimated that less than 30% of the 
web is in English, a proportion that has declined sharply from a rough estimate of 50% in 2000. 50% of 
European citizens speak only one language and when they speak a second one, it is not necessarily English. 
Only 3% of Japanese speak a foreign language. In India, less than 5% of people fluently speak English. 
Preserving languages and, through them, their corresponding culture responds to a strong demand from 
citizens. 
- The second challenge is to enable communication among humans, usually in the framework of common 
democratic structures.  We are facing it in the European Union, where, with the recent expansion, there are 
now 28 member countries and 24 official languages, representing 552 language pairs. If one considers all the 
European languages, one can count more than 100, which represents more than 10,000 pairs of languages to 
translate! The European Commission employs more than 2,500 translators who translate about two million 
pages per year. This covers only a fraction of the needs. To cover the totality would require 8,500 translators 
to process 6.8 million pages annually. Taking into account the EU linguistic diversity represents 30% of the 
budget of the European Parliament, or about 300 million euros per year, with the use of 500 translators and 
interpreters. The estimated total cost of multilingualism for the European Union is a little over one billion 
euros per year; but considering the number of Europeans, that represents only 2.2 euros per citizen per year, 
which ultimately is not prohibitive. The same study conducted for the EC showed that, on the economic side, 
only 33% of the EU citizens would buy goods over the internet in a foreign language while, on the cultural 
side, 80% of the EU citizens think that websites in their language should be translated to foreign languages. 
A similar situation exists within some nations, like India, but also internationally, with more than 6,000 
major languages that are spoken, or 36 million pairs of languages to translate. And a simple statistic: at 
present YouTube, every minute, uploads 100 hours of new videos in all languages! 
Needs related to multilingualism 
At the European level, the needs related to multilingualism are very numerous: needs for the establishment of 
the European Digital Library (Europeana, which included, in 2013, 23 million documents in 26 languages), 
for which it is necessary to provide crosslingual and multilingual tools to enable access for all; for the 
realization of a multilingual platform for alert and information exchange planned by the European Security 
2 
 
Agency (ENISA) for the Member States; for the European Patent Office – The London Protocol has reduced 
the number of official languages to three (English, German and French) for reasons of cost, whereas, with 
more automated tools, more languages could be handled; for meetings of the European Commission, of the 
European Parliament or of the European Court of Justice, where English tends increasingly to become the 
only working language. In 1997, 45% of the source documents to be translated at the EC were in English and 
40% in French, while in 2007, 72% of the documents were in English and 12% in French!  
Such needs respond to a real democratic necessity, to be met more generally at the international level. 
Dubbing and subtitling of audiovisual works; writing technical manuals, in the aerospace or automotive 
industries, or instruction manuals for the consumers; live super-titling of works of performing art; translation 
of texts, videos, and radio or television programs that are innumerable, and in all languages; simultaneous 
interpreting in military or sanitary operations, which take place throughout the world, and at multiple 
meetings, conferences, or workshops; interpretation of courses, with the coming of the Massive Open Online 
Courses (MOOC). Think also of the situation related to scientific articles written in a mother tongue, which 
are diminished markedly due to the overvaluation of English by bibliometrics, risking the loss of specialized 
terminology for innovation and science in other languages. The ratio of papers written in English listed in the 
Web of Science went from 85% to 96% in the period 1980-2000, while te ratio of papers written in French 
went down from 4% to 1%! The ratio of cited papers in English was already 97% in 1990! 
Add to this picture the many needs related to the accessibility of information by the visually or hearing 
impaired, requiring the translation of information from one medium to another (written to oral, oral to 
written, oral to gesture (sign language)), and more generally to the accessibility of information by people 
who do not speak fluently the language in which it was encoded, including, notably, migrants. 
Findings  
The extent of these needs shows very well that they cannot all be covered by existing or even future human 
resources of professions dealing with language processing. 
Taking into account multilingualism is not a top priority in any economic sector. If we ask the CEO of a big 
company what is his/her priority, none will say it is multilingualism. But if we add up the priorities in each 
area where it is necessary to take it into account, then we reach a very large sum. This therefore requires, in 
our opinion, thought and political action to bring out this awareness and provide appropriate responses. 
Even when multilingualism is seen as a necessity, its cost is too important. It is this gap that calls for the 
development of Language Technologies (LT), both for written and spoken language, and their utilization 
when their performance is up to the needs of target applications. 
Languages that lack LT, for example in car GPS, Smartphone interaction, Internet search, or Emergency 
access, will be less and less used, while languages that benefit from crosslingual LT, such as Machine 
Translation or Speech Translation, will get more used. 
 
It should be noted that currently, language technologies have not yet reached maturity for all languages, with 
strong imbalances among languages. For example, automated translation is not good enough to translate 
literary works or, in general, texts which require high quality translation. This must be said clearly. But on 
the other hand, it can help a human translator in his or her work and has a sufficient quality to give an 
approximate translation, of web pages for example, thus meeting the needs of the general public. 
Language Technologies 
Language technologies are said to be monolingual when they handle a single language, multilingual when 
the same technology processes several (individual) languages, or crosslingual when they allow for switching 
and transferring from one language to another. 
Language technologies cover the processing of written language, whether monolingual (morphosyntactic and 
syntactic analysis; text understanding; text generation; automatic summarization; terminology extraction; 
information retrieval; systems that respond to questions, etc.) or crosslingual (automatic or computer-aided 
translation; crosslingual information retrieval, etc.). 
For the processing of spoken language, there are also monolingual technologies (speech recognition and 
understanding; speech-to-text transcription (textual transcription of what has been said); speech synthesis; 
spoken dialogue; speaker recognition, etc.…) and crosslingual (identification of a spoken language, speech 
3 
 
translation, real-time interpretation, etc.). 
Finally, it includes the processing of signed languages (recognition, synthesis and translation). 
These technologies can be intermedia, ie translating from one medium to another, with numerous 
applications to enable accessibility for the disabled (Text-To-Speech synthesis for the visually impaired, 
automatic transcription (subtitles or supertitles), aids to lip reading, Sign Language processing for the 
hearing impaired, voice commands for the motor-impaired). 
Numerous resulting applications are now in everyday use, such as, regarding written language processing, 
spelling and grammar checkers, monolingual and crosslingual search engines, online machine translation…, 
and, regarding spoken language processing, talking GPS systems, dictation systems, transcription and 
automatic indexing of audiovisual content... This list shows that many of these existing applications are 
related to linking spoken and written language (transcription of speech into text, speech synthesis from text). 
Spoken dialogue systems, including voice recognition and synthesis, are also growing, but in very specific 
applications: Voice command on mobile phones, Call centers, tourist or public transportation information, 
etc. 
Language Resources and Evaluation 
It is crucial for conducting research aiming at developing language technologies to provide a base that 
includes both language resources and evaluation methods for the technologies that are developed. 
With regard to language resources, the data (corpus, lexicons, dictionaries, terminology databases, etc.) are 
both necessary for conducting research investigations in linguistics and for training automatic language 
processing systems that are based in most cases on statistical methods. The greater the amount of data, the 
better the statistical model and therefore the better the system performances. The interoperability of language 
resources also invites us to think more deeply on the standards to be put in place in order to organize, 
browse, and transmit data. 
It is also necessary to have a means for evaluating these technologies in order to compare the performance of 
systems, using a common protocol with common test data, in the context of evaluation campaigns. This 
allows for comparing different approaches and having an indicator of the quality of the research and of the 
advances of technology, and of the adequacy of a technology to respond to the needs of an application. We 
now speak of "coopetition"- a mix of international competition and cooperation - and this has become a way 
to carry on technological research. 
The digital divide and language coverage 
There is currently a two-speed situation and a "digital divide" between languages for which technologies 
exist, and others. This is related to the "weight of languages". It should be noted that 95% of languages are 
spoken by only 6% of world population. Some linguists believe that 90% of languages will have disappeared 
within a century. We can therefore classify languages according to the data and automatic processing systems 
that exist for these languages: whether they are well, less or not at all "resourced", or indeed if they have only 
an oral tradition and no writing system at all. Only 1-2% of languages presently benefit from language 
technologies. The availability of data is crucial for the development of usable systems, often based on 
statistical approaches. 
In order to resolve this digital divide, how can we take into account "minority" languages, regional 
languages, languages spoken by migrants, foreign or regional accents? Who bears the cost when these 
languages are of no economic or political interest, or are unrelated to armed conflicts or natural disasters that 
justify addressing them? How to ensure that citizens in a community of states are able to communicate 
among themselves? How to reduce the risk of conflicts and crises by allowing exchanges between people? 
This is now a major social and political issue, which is the subject of much debate.  
Research efforts in the domain 
To produce the language resources and technologies that are needed to address multilingualism, different 
initiatives can be identified: 
- Those of big companies. It must be underlined that many large U.S. companies in the information 
technology sector, such as like Google, Microsoft, Apple, IBM, Amazon, eBay or Facebook, make a major 
effort in multilingualism and crosslingualism, some of them taking advantage of their access to huge amount 
4 
 
of data for developing better systems. The Google search engines work in 145 languages (national and 
regional), and Google has made available "free" tools for machine translation and crosslingual information 
retrieval online. Google Translate handles 72 languages and 5,112 language pairs on the Internet and on 
smartphones, including 17 languages with voice input, and 26 languages with voice output and several 
varieties of English, Chinese and Spanish. It also now allows for camera input. It is claimed to have 200 
million users and to translate 1 million documents per day: more than what translators do worldwide in a 
year. And Google targets 100 languages, i.e. 10,000 language pairs, by 2015. The Google Book Search 
Library contains 30 million documents in 46 languages and in December 2010 Google provided statistics on 
the evolution of human language from a corpus of 500 billion words (including 361 billion words in English 
and 45 billion words in French and Spanish). Apple Siri provides spoken interaction with iPhones in 8 
languages and 19 language varieties. Also Microsoft provides the MS Word spelling checker in 126 
languages (233 if we consider regional variants) and the grammar checker in 6 languages (61 if we consider 
regional variants). 
- National programs in some countries, with different objectives: to process an internal multilingualism 
(TDIL (Technology Development for Indian Languages) in India, developing Language Technologies for the 
22 Indian official languages, NHN (National Human Language Technology Network) in South Africa, 
addressing the 11 official languages; to understand foreign languages for geopolitical reasons (GALE or 
EARS in the United States, funded by the Department of Defense (DARPA)); to ensure the use and 
promotion of a national or transnational language (TechnoLangue for French, STEVIN for Dutch/Flemish); 
or to maintain a place in an economic and cultural competition (Quaero in France). 
- Efforts to support R & D programs of the European Commission. Research is state-of-the-art in Europe as 
it appears in the results of the international evaluation campaign. But development in LT is only conducted 
by SMEs, and there is not yet a EC program addressing LT to support Multilingualism in the EU as a 
political issue (only as a research issue for the time being). A study conducted by the EC T4ME project 
showed that 21 European languages are in danger of digital extinction. Should we abandon them? Should we 
let US companies take care of them? The EC probably doesn’t have enough forces to address by itself all LT 
for all EU official languages, and furthermore for all European languages, that would require more and better 
coordination with EU Member States and Regions. 
 
Conclusion and Perspectives 
Multilingualism is a fundamental dimension of the European Union, and is mandatory in order to preserve 
national cultures and allow for communication. But Multilingualism is very costly. Language Technologies 
can cut those costs and are therefore the only way to allow for Multilingualism, in Europe and worldwide. 
In order to develop Language Technologies, Language Resources and Language Technology evaluation are 
needed, while they are presently available only for a very small set of languages. The other languages are 
therefore in danger of digital extinction.  
It is thus proposed to launch a program aiming at developing LT covering all European languages through a 
joint coordinated effort between the European Commission, the Member States and the regions, ensuring the 
availability of Language Resources and of evaluated Language Technologies through a common platform. 
This model could be extended to include non-EU third parties. 
