SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/TermBases/INFORTERM_History_EN.pdf

 Ο 
Ε  Λ  Ο   Τ    Ε 48 
  1 
 
INFORTERM: 
Database of IT terms 
Resulting from the work of ELOT/TC48/WG1 
“Information Technology Terminology”, 
Collective Member of ELETO 
E 
Λ  
Ε  Τ  Ο 
L 
E 
 
August 2022 
 
Short history of the Termbase INFORTERM 
 
 
The Information Technology TermBase INFORTERM is trilingual and includes the Greek terms produced by the 
Group ELOT/TE48/OE1 “Information Technology Terminology” and equivalent English terms and French terms, 
based on International Standards (ISO/IEC 2382 series) of the International Organization for Standardization 
(ISO) and the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). 
The creation of the Information Technology TermBase INFORTERM, the registration of all terminological data in 
it, and their electronic processing have been done and are being done personally by the chairman of the Group 
ELOT/TE48/OE1, Kostas Valeontis, who has also the responsibility for the content in the website. 
Accessing and searching the IT TermBase INFORTERM is free on the Internet, in order to promote usage of 
modern IT terms by anybody concerned both inside the IT sector and in a wider area outside of it, given the 
intension and extension of the development of this sector within the framework of the Information Society. 
Initially, free availability on the Internet was decided by a three-party Agreement among : 
 
ELETO, being the superior organization for coordination and support of Greek terminology, one of the 
founding collective members of which is ELOT/TC48/WG1, 
 
the Department of Informatics of the Athens University of Economics and Business (AUEB), providing 
the necessary electronic infrastructure, and 
 
the Chairman of ELOT/TC48/WG1, as the creator of the termbase being responsible for its dynamic 
operation, maintenance and development. 
Now, because – for technical reasons – the termbase on AUEB cannot be updated, access is offered via 
ELETO's website. 
The field structure of the Termbase INFORTERM comprises the following basic fields (corresponding to one and 
only one concept for each entry): 
BASIC FIELDS OF INFORTERM  
EXAMPLES 
Greek term 
λόγος δυφιακών σφαλμάτων 
Greek abbreviation 
BER 
English term 
bit error ratio, bit error rate 
English abbreviation 
BER 
French term 
taux d'erreur binaire, taux d'erreur sur les bits 
French abbreviation 
TEB 
Foreign source title 
ISO/IEC 2382-9:1995 
Greek source title 
ΕΛΟΤ 996.9 
Stage of processing 
3 
 
Today, the termbase INFORTERM contains 7.135 terminological entries of information technology. 
2 
 
Note 1 
Since there is no national language policy for establishing rules of creation and application purely Greek 
acronyms and abbreviations, the English ones are generally used both in Information Technology and in 
Telecommunications. 
Note 2 
Terms being in stage of processing 3 are definitive. Those in stage 2 have been prepared by ELOT/TE48/OE1 
and are in a Draft status for Public Enquiry. Stage 4 or greater indicates that the relevant term has been 
subjected to one or more revisions. 
 
 
