SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/7th%20Conference/7th_11-21-HarperTodd_Paper_V05.pdf

ELETO – 7
th Conference ”Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
Athens, Greece, 22-24 October 2009 
From the corporate to the material: How the translation of liturgical 
terms shifted the emphasis in Christian worship 
    
M. Todd Harper 
SUMMARY 
The development of liturgical terms within the early Church has often shifted the meaning of a word from 
its original to a meaning that reflects changes in the church’s development. This is particularly true in the 
development of ἐκκλησία, which Paul and the Gospel writers use to designate the Christian community, 
literally those who have been called (καλέω-ῶ) out (ἐκ).  However, with the building of physical 
structures to house the gathering of Christians, ἐκκλησία increasing came to designate the physical 
structure as much as the gathering.   Moreover, the attributes that early Christian writers ascribed to the 
ἐκκλησία as the gathering of Christians, such as Paul’s description of the church as the “body of Christ,” 
were projected into the meaning of the physical buildings so that the brick and mortar of the Basilica, for 
instance, also became the “body of Christ.”  In this paper, I will trace the development of the word 
ἐκκλησία  and its effect upon the early Church as a body of worshippers and a physical structure. 
 
Από το συλλογικό στο υλικό: Πώς η μετάφραση λειτουργικών όρων 
μετατόπισε την έμφαση στη Χριστιανική λατρεία 
    
M. Todd Harper 
ΠΕΡΙΛΗΨΗ 
Η ανάπτυξη των λειτουργικών όρων μέσα στην πρώτη Εκκλησία συχνά μετατόπισε την αρχική σημασία 
της λέξης. Αυτό αληθεύει ιδιαίτερα στην ανάπτυξη της ἐκκλησίας, την οποία ο Παύλος και οι 
Ευαγγελιστές χρησιμοποιούν για να κατασημάνουν την κοινότητα των Χριστιανών, εκείνους δηλαδή που 
κυριολεκτικά έχουν κληθεί (καλέω-ῶ) έξω (ἐκ).  Με την κατασκευή υλικών δομών για να στεγασθεί η 
συγκέντρωση των χριστιανών, η ἐκκλησία επεκτεινόμενη έφτασε να κατασημαίνει τόσο το υλικό 
οικοδόμημα όσο και την σύναξη των Χριστιανών.   Επιπλέον, τα γνωρίσματα που οι πρώτοι Χριστιανοί 
συγγραφείς αποδίδουν στην ἐκκλησία, όπως η περιγραφή του Παύλου για την εκκλησία ως «σώμα του 
Χριστού», προβλήθηκαν στη σημασία των υλικών κτιρίων ώστε το τούβλο και το ασβεστοκονίαμα της 
Βασιλικής, για παράδειγμα, σύντομα έγινε το «σώμα του Χριστού».  Στην παρούσα εργασία θα 
ανιχνεύσουμε την ανάπτυξη της λέξης ἐκκλησία και την επίδρασή της πάνω στην πρώτη Εκκλησία ως 
σώμα λατρευτών και ως υλική κατασκευή. 
 
0   Introduction 
The relationship between the abstract spaces used for rhetorical invention and 
memorization, what the ancient Greeks and Romans called τόποι and commonplaces, 
respectively, and the physical spaces of architecture that too were used for memory and 
invention (commonly, as meditation) should not surprise us.  Perhaps, it lies in the Greek 
ELETO – 7
th Conference ”Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
Athens, Greece, 22-24 October 2009 
2 
and Roman etymologies for space, τόπος or τόποι (pl) and loci that made their way into the 
language of rhetoric.  Perhaps, it is because architecture itself is simply a different 
incarnation of the concept of text, a physical and material rendering of symbols and 
meanings, and, therefore, is open to the same types of rhetorical processes that other oral 
and written texts are exposed to.  Perhaps, as Mary Carruthers seems to suggest, space is 
a place where one can locate, inventory, and retrieve objects, whether they are abstract 
concepts and images, as in the case of rhetorical τόποι, or material items as in the case of 
furniture that might be stored in a room [1] .  What is interesting is when the two seem to 
influence each other so that the functions of the mental and physical text become blurred.  
When medieval monks wanted to visualize their spiritual journey, Carruthers notes, they 
imagined the Jewish temple described in Ezekiel and I Kings.  The seven steps leading up 
to the temple became the seven qualities of a good monk seeking entrance into the kingdom 
of heaven.  As the visualizing of the temple became a common τόπος within monastic 
literature, the monastic buildings began to incorporate these meditative τόποι so that the 
same seven steps would begin to appear in the physical architecture with the purpose of 
physically reminding the monk of his more symbolic ascent into heaven [1].   Carruthers tells 
us that the purpose of these abstract and material spaces was to aid the medieval monk in 
locating, collecting, and creating texts.  The individual τόποι, such as the seven steps 
towards the temple described in Jewish texts, become places where other ideas and texts 
can be located and collected, such as seven qualities of a good monk.  These emerging 
inventories of objects can then be used to create oral and written texts as well as physical 
buildings or, what we might call, architectural texts [1].  
I will explore the relationship between the abstract τόποι used for rhetorical memory and 
invention and the material places found in architecture.  Nowhere is this more apparent in 
the Byzantine and medieval period then in the word ἐκκλησία, a word used to designate 
those who gathered as Christians and the place where they gathered.  The ἐκκλησία quickly 
became a commonplace of invention for early writers to designate attributes and develop an 
emerging theology.  The Apostle Paul, for instance, argues that those who have been called 
(καλῶ) out (ἐκ) to spread the message and do the work of Christ are themselves the 
collective and living “body of Christ” imbued by the Holy Spirit.  With the building of physical 
structures for the ecclesia to gather, sometimes called κυριακόν, or house(s) (οἶκος) of the 
Lord (Κυρίου), but more often simply called ἡ ἐκκλησία, a metonymic substitution of the part, 
the place where the gathers gather, with the whole, the gatherers, or those who have been 
called out (the Pauline and early Christian ἐκκλησία).  Thus, these physical structures, which 
ELETO – 7
th Conference ”Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
Athens, Greece, 22-24 October 2009 
3 
took their original shape and function from Roman aristocratic farms where the first century 
church often met, became imbued with the attributes that the early Christians had assigned 
to the church as a collection of people.  Not surprisingly, at the height of the iconoclastic 
controversy and after Hagia Sofia had established itself as the great Byzantine basilica, 
Geranumus, an eight century patriarch, begins his mystagogy or catechumenal lectures with 
the declaration “’Εκκλησία ἐστί ναός θεού, τέμενος ἃγιον, οἶκος προσευχῆς, συνάθροιση 
λαού, σώμα Χριστοῦ, (1984: 56 [4])” “The Church [physical structure] is the temple of God, a 
holy place, a house of prayer, a gathering of people, the body of Christ (1984: 57 [4]).”  
Unlike his predecessors, Cyril of Jerusalem, Theodore of Mopseustia, or John Chrysostom, 
who organize their mystagogical lectures around the various acts of the liturgy, Germanus 
arranges his lectures around the various places within the church as well as the material 
objects located therein.  In the same instance, Germanus uses the physical location of 
rooms and objects as a way to develop and generate his own lectures; he projects onto the 
physical building those attributes which had been assigned to the word ecclesia so that the 
building becomes a physical text wherein the clergy and laity may reflect upon Christ’s life 
as well as generate their own texts.  This paper will trace the development of this word as 
both an abstract and theological concept as well as a physical structure. 
1   Rhetorical Topoi as Memory and Invention 
In order for us to begin to understand how Byzantine and medieval Christians played with 
the abstract concept and architectural realization of ἐκκλησία as a rhetorical commonplace 
for memorization, contemplation, and invention, we must first study how ancient rhetoricians 
viewed memory and invention.  Both memory and invention were included among the many 
lists of rhetorical canons that stretched from Aristotle to Cicero.  While they were separated 
and placed at opposite ends of the spectrum with invention at the beginning of the canon 
and memory at its end, they were linked in the minds of Greek and Roman rhetoricians.   
These rhetoricians employed the spatial tropes of τόποι and loci as ways to think about 
memory and invention at the same time.  They understood the importance and power of 
place to help train the mind to produce texts.  Nowhere is this more evident than in the 
Rhetorica ad Herennium, where the reader is asked to visualize “the plan of a visual house, 
in whose rooms and recesses an orator should ‘place’ images that recall to him the material 
he intends to talk about” (1998: 7 [1]) as a mnemonic device for memorizing texts.  
Carruthers terms this “locational memory” and argues that medieval scholars and monks, 
with whom I would include most early Christian thinkers, used this form of memory as a tool 
to develop ideas.  The medieval thinker might respond to an idea or thought by intentionally 
ELETO – 7
th Conference ”Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
Athens, Greece, 22-24 October 2009 
4 
committing it to memory, that is, by thoughtfully placing it within a visual, often spatial 
framework.  This memory would be classified and categorized with other memories.  
(Carruthers reminds us that the Latin word inventio contains the root for both the English 
words “invent” and “invention” as well as the English word “inventory” [1].)  In other words, 
the medieval scholar or monk would generate (invent) ideas and texts in part by the way that 
they associated images (place them within an inventory) with one another.  By locating and 
then associating and inventorying objects, one was able to see new relationships that, in 
turn, allowed one to come up with new ideas.  These first two stages, location and 
association, thus, led to the third stage of invention.  
Early Christians understood this and often employed architectural metaphors as a means of 
thinking through spiritual development.   In his first letter to the Corinthians, Paul employs 
what Carruthers calls the language of the “master-builder” to express how the early Christian 
must build upon the theologically and spiritually strong foundation of Christ: 
According to the grace of God which is given unto me, as a wise master-builder, I 
have laid the foundation, and another buildeth thereon.  But let every man take 
heed how he buildeth thereupon. For no other foundation can no man lay than that 
is laid, which is Jesus Christ.  Now if any man build upon this foundation gold, 
silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble, every man’s work shall be made 
manifest: for the day of the Lord shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by 
fire. Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the spirit of God dwelleth 
in you?  If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy; for the temple 
of God is holy, which temple ye are?  (I Corinthian 6:16-23 Quoted in Carruthers, 
1998: 15 [1]) 
Paul is responding to divisions within the Church in Corinth by stating that neither Paul nor 
Apollos (a leader in the Church of Corinth) should be the foundation for anyone’s faith.  
Rather, it should only be Christ.  Paul, Apollos, and the other leaders of the church are 
simply “master-builders” who build upon that foundation set forth and which is Christ, just as 
those who follow will be “master-builders” upon what has already been built.  Carruthers, 
however, notes that the importance of the passage lies in how it  “gave license to a virtual 
industry of exegetical metaphors” (1998: 17 [1]) that would be used for centuries to follow in 
order to describe that development of Church thought through the reverence and 
indebtedness of one generation to the previous generations.  She finds the same metaphor, 
for instance, used in Gregory the Greats description of Biblical exegesis: 
ELETO – 7
th Conference ”Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
Athens, Greece, 22-24 October 2009 
5 
First we put in place the foundations of literal meaning [historia]; then through 
typological interpretation we build up the fabric of our mind in the walled city of 
faith; and at the end, through the grace of our moral understanding, as though with 
added color, we clothe the building.  (Quoted in Carruthers, 1998:18 [1]) 
In this particular pattern, the biblical scholar builds upon previous interpretations of the Bible, 
either those interpretations that have been laid out before him by others or his own 
interpretation, beginning with a more literal and historical read and then advancing to a more 
allegorical and typological reading.  This idea of “layering,” we shall see, was eventually 
projected out onto the physical space of early Christian architecture. 
We can begin to see this projection of mental concepts onto physical structures in the 
example that Carruthers uses to observe the relationship between rhetorical τόποι and 
architectural spaces.  She argues that mental and literal pictures of buildings, often the 
Temple described in Ezekiel and 1Kings,  provided a visual figure for monks to mediate on 
the “proper” or “divine” way.  For example, she cites the activity of “measuring the pattern” of 
the Holy City described in Ezekiel: 
Thou son of man, show the temple to the house of Israel, that they may be 
ashamed of their iniquities: and let them measure the pattern, and blush from all 
they have done.  Show them the plan of the house, and of its fabric, its exits, and 
entrances, and its whole description, and all of its precepts, and the rest of its 
ordering, and all its laws, and write [them] before their sight so that they may store 
away all its descriptions and its precepts, and fashion them.  (Quoted in Carruthers 
1998:230 [1]) 
Jewish mystics and early and medieval monks often associated the act of measuring the 
temple with acts of penitence, contrition, and return to God.  The Jewish mystic Ezekiel sees 
the measuring as the penintence, contrition, and return to God of the Jewish people.  In like 
manner, the early Church father Gregory the Great develops ten influential sermons that 
meditate on Ezekiel 40 as a penitential text for Christians.  Importantly, Carruthers notes, 
Gregory viewed the building allegorically, as a spiritual rather than a physical dwelling: the 
“seven levels up to the sanctuary,” she observes, “are a mnemonic for the seven stages of 
wisdom,” citing Gregory himself, “’In our mind the first level of the staircase is the fear of 
God, the second piety, the third knowledge, the fourth perserverance, the fifth counsel, the 
sixth understanding, the seventh wisdom” (1998: 243 [1]).  For the medieval monk, the 
seven steps becomes a way to meditate on the figurative “steps” he must take in order to 
ELETO – 7
th Conference ”Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
Athens, Greece, 22-24 October 2009 
6 
gain entrance into the heavenly kingdom.  By “locating” and “associating” these attributes 
into a visual image, Gregory is able to create a pattern for himself and his audience.  
Importantly, Carruthers states that latter monks often attempted to actualize the plans of the 
temple, not in terms of the temple measurements described in the old testament, but rather 
in terms of visions that they had.  Monks who had these visions often brought sketches 
before their prior, who then used those sketches as the foundation for building an actual 
monastery.  In other words, the mental texts, which were often the result of long meditations, 
were in turn actualized in physical buildings that then assumed the symbolic proportions of 
the mental texts. 
At this point, it is important to note some of the differences between a medieval and ancient 
understanding of rhetorical topoi, an understanding that reveals an important difference in 
the two systems of thought.   In the case of the the ancient sources, rhetorical topoi and 
commonplaces are presented as adversarial.  For example, Aristotle presents one way of 
verbally countering an opponent by redefining important terms as one of the several topoi 
that fall under the category of definition.  Redefinition becomes a way of developing an 
argument that can parry one’s adversary in the Assembly or before the Court.   In the case 
of early and medieval Christian sources, the relationships among writers are often seen as 
less adversarial, especially when one source is seen as an older, more authoritative source 
in which the younger writer might build his structure upon.  (This is not to say that early 
Christian writing was not adversarial.  Indeed, it often was.)  When early writers discuss 
specific τόποι, they generally do so in the context of a constructive relationship, seeking to 
build on one another. 
More importantly, the concept of memory that the church held was somewhat different from 
Aristotle, Cicero, and the Rhetorica ad Hernennium.   In fact, the early church’s concept of 
memory or, what it termed, anamnesis hearkened back to a much older Platonic view that 
more directly linked memory and invention.  Every activity and action of the early Church 
was always necessitated as a means for remembering and meditating on Christ’s life, 
teachings, crucifixion, and resurrection.  On the one hand, this meant reflecting on Christ 
historically.  For example, during the liturgical seasons of Easter and Pentecost, Byzantine 
Christians recalled the historical events that led to Christ’s crucifixion and resurrection as 
well as to the founding of the Church.  With the exception of the resurrection, these events 
were seen as having occurred at a specific historical moment in the past and, thus, were 
irretrievable except as a memory in the more ordinary sense of the word.  On the other 
ELETO – 7
th Conference ”Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
Athens, Greece, 22-24 October 2009 
7 
hand, both the resurrection and the presence of Christ were seen as eternal.  Acts that 
acknowledged this, such as the saying of the Eucharistic prayer, moved beyond simply 
making a past event present to making the invisible visible.  In other words, through the 
Eucharist, the Bishop made visible and tangible the reality of the resurrected Christ.  We 
may also think of both forms of memory in terms of religious iconography.  On the one hand, 
religious iconography depicts the lives of the saints in a manner that allowed the often 
illiterate congregations to learn the most salient features of the saints’ life.  Through an array 
of symbols, the laity might learn that John the Baptist was beheaded, while John the 
Evangelist had the divine revelation.   On the other hand, the icon alerts the laity to attend to 
the divine presence of that saint in the physical walls of the church.  This is particularly true 
of Christ the Pantocrator who gazes down at the laity in the nave or looks out at them from 
the iconostasis.   
The form of memory or anamnesis which makes the invisible visible is largely Platonic.   In 
the Phaedrus, Socrates describes dialectics as a way of making the invisible ideals visible, a 
way that at first seems to draw them out from the memory of the person until that person 
realizes that the ideals were always and already present.  He relates the myth of the 
Charioteer, noting that the mortal who is by nature destined to be reborn on earth had once 
glimpsed the ideals, while riding an unwieldy chariot before birth.  Having fallen to earth and 
been born in human form, the person forgets what he has glimpsed until he responds to the 
quality of that ideal reflected in his beloved.  He might admire the beloved for her beauty, 
honesty, or courage before realizing that it is not the beloved’s individual beauty, honesty, or 
courage that he has fallen in love with, but rather the reflection of those ideals in the 
beloved.  Through careful philosophical reflection by means of defining and defining again 
those ideas, what we might call Socratic dialectics, the person can increasingly bring the 
ideals into focus and become aware of their presence.  Moreover, the person can use his 
increased, though never perfect, understanding of the ideals in a way that any future 
statement or declaration grows organically from the truth rather than attempting to 
manipulate it, as Socrates so often sees in sophistic rhetoric [7].  In the church, the 
resurrected Christ takes the place of the Platonic ideal.  Christ’s divine presence is made 
known through various rituals and actions of the church.   
It is from the experience of this divine presence that the members of the church can begin to 
articulate and, in the words of Paul, build upon the foundation of Christ.  In Plato, the ideals 
are first encountered through the love of the beloved.  It is from this emotion or state that the 
ELETO – 7
th Conference ”Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
Athens, Greece, 22-24 October 2009 
8 
person can begin to reason, define, and describe the ideals they sense in the beloved.  
Although Carruthers does not address Plato in this manner, she notes that a psychology of 
memory developed in the middle ages, one that emphasized emotion and the experience of 
memory as prior to reasoned development of an argument.  One only need think of the 
visual nature of mnemonic images.  While they could not be as precise as memorizing 
actual text, an act that Carruthers finds impossible, they could provide a sense of the object 
memorized in a manner that through reflection would allow the person to recall and 
regenerate the text.  Finally, we see this in John Chrysostom who speaks of the “awe-
inspiring mysteries” and “bloodless sacrifice” as experiences within the liturgy that allow us 
to move from the sensual to a more abstract understanding and acknowledgement of the 
presence of the resurrected Christ.  
2   Rhetorical spaces and Architectural Places 
 At this point, we may begin to examine the physical structure of the church and the way it 
became imbued with meaning from the early church’s developing understanding of 
ἐκκλησία.  In pointing this out, I would be remiss if I suggested that a full theology of 
ἐκκλησία shaped the planning and development of the first church’s whose structures drew 
more immediately from the Roman aristocratic farms where early Christians gathered than 
from any developed sense of the church as gathering or as “those who had been called out.”  
Gregory Dix, Hugh Wybrew, and Richard Krauthimer all argue that the rectangular shape 
and various functions of the different spaces of the Roman noble’s house had a profound 
impact on the structure of the earliest Christian structures or Bassilicas ([2], [5], [8]).  The 
Roman noble house was rectangular in shape with a large, open atrium in the center.  At 
one end of the atrium was the entrance hall or vesitibulum where the guests were greeted, 
while at the opposite end was the tablinium, a room that functioned as a reception area and 
a shrine to the Roman gods.  Dix notes, “when the whole patrician clan met in family 
conclave or for family rites, there was placed [in the tablinum] the great chair of the 
paterfamilias, the head of the clan, and around him sat the heads of the junior branches, 
while the younger members and dependents stood assembled facing them in the atrium” 
(2005:35 [2]).  Dix states that with the removal of the Roman gods, the structure became a 
perfect place for early Christians to gather.  The Bishop would occupy the great chair, the 
presbyters and deacons surrounding him, while the laity would be seated outside in the 
open area of the atrium.   With the roofing of the atrium, the entrance hall became the 
narthex, the atrium the nave, and the tablinum the sanctuary where the Eucharistic rites 
were performed.  Dix and others are quick to point out the relative speed in which these 
ELETO – 7
th Conference ”Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
Athens, Greece, 22-24 October 2009 
9 
spaces began symbols for larger theological meanings.  The stone table where the family 
sat quickly became the altar, while the  impluvium or large tank where guests ritualistically 
washed themselves almost immediately became the Baptismal font [2].   
Yet, it is as the term ta ecclesía evolves that the various spaces of these buildings take on 
increased symbolic meaning. 
In the Gospels and Epistles, ta ecclesía begins to take on the characteristic of a rhetorical 
commonplace and, thus, develops its own theology.  The word, which dates back to ancient 
Greece, originally designated the assembly of elders (though it could also designate the 
place of assembly), appears in the Gospels as well as Epistles.  In the Gospels, Christ 
seems to allude to the future church when ἐκκλησία is used.  In one of the most important 
places, he plays with the etymology of Peter’s name, telling him, “Peter (Petrós) on this rock 
(petrá), I will build (oikodomeso) my church (ten ecclesian)” [Matthew 16:18 [3]). Generally, 
scholars focus on the play of Peter, derived from Petros, as the rock.  Yet, Christ’s use of ta 
ecclesía to designate church, a physical object that can be built as well as the gathering of 
followers that Peter will eventually lead, suggests an interesting play between the two 
meanings of ta ecclesía that begin to emerge over the next three centuries.  Elsewhere, 
when the Gospels refer to a physical structure, it is most often the temple or house of God.  
Here the Gospel writers use naós, ierós, or oíkos kyriou, as when Jesus is said to teach at 
the temple in Matthew or when he chases out the money changers, stating that the “it is 
written that my house [referring to the temple as God’s house] will be called a house of 
prayer (oíkos proseuchés)” (Matthew 21:13 [3]).  However, the Gospels redefine this term.  
As Gregory Dix notes, the temple in ancient culture was not the place where people 
gathered on specific days, as the church is a place where Christians congregate on 
Sundays and Holy Days, but rather a place that the Gods inhabited as well as a place where 
one made sacrifice [2].  It is in this sense that Christ tells the Pharisees that in three days if 
they destroy this temple (naós)  he will build it back up, referring not to public temple, but to 
his own death and resurrection (John 2:19 [3]).  The temple of God resides in Christ as an 
individual and not in a physical place. We see this concept taken up and amplified by Paul in 
his letters to the various early congregations.  
Yet, to discover the concepts that were associated with the gathering that would later be 
associated with the physical structure that contained that gathering, we need to look at Paul. 
Paul expands the definition of ἐκκλησία, among other things, to label the early church as the 
collective body of Christ.   It is in Paul that we first become aware of ἐκκλησία in its more 
ELETO – 7
th Conference ”Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
Athens, Greece, 22-24 October 2009 
10 
etymological sense of those who are called (kaleó) out (ek).  In order for Paul to identify the 
early church, which included both Gentiles and Jews, he had to move away from notions of 
divine inheritance based on tribal affiliation and ethnicity.  In other words, because the Jews 
and the largely Greek, African, and Roman gentiles were not of the same race, he had to 
develop a way to identify them as the chosen people without relying on traditional means.  
For Paul,  the early church are granted salvation and divine inheritance because they have 
individually heard and responded to God’s call to do good works and spread the good news 
in the name of his son, Jesus Christ.  It is in this regard that Paul further amplifies the 
meaning of ta ecclesía or those who have gathered and been called out to include the body 
of Christ.  In the passage quoted above from first Corinthians, Paul asks, “Know ye not that 
ye are the temple of God (naós theou), and that the spirit of God dwelleth in you?  If any 
man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy; for the temple of God is holy, which 
temple (naós)  ye are?” (1 Corinthians 6: 17 [2]).  Paul addresses both the individuals of the 
church and the church as a whole as “the temple of God.”  Because they responded to 
God’s call, often within Christ’s absence, the one and the many that make up the early 
gathering of Christians have been blessed with the Holy Spirit and thus have, individually 
and collectively, become “the temple of God,” which Christ, also attributes to as “my father’s 
house” and “a house of prayer.”   
Paul’s most complicated articulation and expansion of ἐκκλησία seems to occur in his letter 
to the early church in Epheseus.  What Paul then does is to transfer the topoi that Christ 
uses when discussing the individual to the of the church as a whole.  For example, Paul 
compares the church (ta ekklessía) to the body, stating the Christ and its leaders function as 
its head which guide the rest into making good choices.  He amplifies this comparison then 
by noting that the church is at once the body of Christ, while at the same time, the bride of 
Christ.  In one of the most complicated, if not difficult passages, for modern readers, 
  22Wives, submit to your husbands as to the Lord. 23For the husband is the head of 
the wife as Christ is the head of the church, his body, of which he is the Savior. 
24Now as the church submits to Christ, so also wives should submit to their 
husbands in everything.  25Husbands, love your wives, just as Christ loved the 
church and gave himself up for her 26to make her holy, cleansing[b] her by the 
washing with water through the word, 27and to present her to himself as a radiant 
church, without stain or wrinkle or any other blemish, but holy and blameless. 28In 
this same way, husbands ought to love their wives as their own bodies. He who 
ELETO – 7
th Conference ”Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
Athens, Greece, 22-24 October 2009 
11 
loves his wife loves himself. 29After all, no one ever hated his own body, but he 
feeds and cares for it, just as Christ does the church— 30for we are members of his 
body. 31"For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his 
wife, and the two will become one flesh."[c] 32This is a profound mystery—but I am 
talking about Christ and the church. 33However, each one of you also must love his 
wife as he loves himself, and the wife must respect her husband.  (Ephesians 5:22-
33 [3]) 
This passage quoted from Ephesians takes marriage as its controlling metaphor.  Paul then 
extends the metaphor to say that in marriage two individuals become one body.  He does 
this by first imploring the one to look after the other as though the other was himself or 
herself, literally his or her body.  In similar manner, we are also joined to the Body of Christ, 
while also being a part of that body of Christ.  In speaking in this manner, Paul builds upon 
Christ’s own idea that the body is the temple by making the body mean the body of the 
individual, that is, to use Paul’s analogy, the individual body of the bride and the bridegroom, 
the body of the collective, that is, the married couple, and the body of Christ. 
In the hands of the Gospel writers and Paul, ta ecclesía becomes a rhetorical commonplace 
where similar ideas begin to congregate and gather.  If we paraphrase Paul’s use of  the 
architectural and foundational metaphor, we might even say that ἐκκλησία becomes the 
foundation upon which is built an entire theology.  Ironically, since ἐκκλησία, even in its 
ancient and early Christian writings, implies both a gathering of people and the place where 
they gather, we have an architectural metaphor that helps to lay the foundation and 
interpretation for the buildings that the early Christians would later build.  Having said this, 
however, we cannot say with complete certainty when various parts of the physical building 
were provided certain designations, as when Germanus, the eigth century Patriarch of 
Constantinople, writes that the sanctuary surrounding the altar represents the cave where 
Christ was born and the cave where he was placed after the crucifixion [4].  We do know, as 
Carruthers notes, that early Christians imposed the meaning of the temple onto the physical 
buildings so that the three part structure of a Basilica like Hagia Sofia with a narthex, nave, 
and sanctuary drew upon the three divisions of the temple, the last of which was the Holy of 
Holy’s [1].   In addition, we know that the organization and interpretation of the church as 
building developed as an understanding of the liturgies that were performed in the church as 
it evolved.  The table that existed in the tablinum, for instance, immediately became 
identified with the altar.  With this identification, the sanctuary surrounding the altar was 
ELETO – 7
th Conference ”Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
Athens, Greece, 22-24 October 2009 
12 
quickly associated with Golgotha where Christ was sacrificed and crucified [2].  In the early 
mystagogical or catechumenal texts of Cyril of Jerusalem, Theodore of Mopseuestia, and 
John Chrysostom, the physical space of the church, when it is identified and explicated often 
takes on significance in its relation to liturgical acts.  Indeed, we can hear this in the fifth 
century Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, which is often attributed to Pseudo-Dionysius: 
. . . By bringing Jesus Christ before our eyes, the bishop thus shows in sensible 
fashion and in image that which is the very life of our soul: he reveals to us how 
Christ Himself came out of His mysterious, divine sanctuary out of love for man and 
took on human form, becoming totally incarnate but without any confusion; how 
Christ descended to our divided condition without any change in His essential unity 
to and called the human race to association with Himself and His own good gifts, 
provided that we unite ourselves to His most divine life by imitating it insofar as we 
can, that we become sufficiently perfect to enter truly into communion with God and 
the divine mysteries. (quoted in Meyendorf 1984:15 [6])  
While the author of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy clearly has the anaphora, or offering of 
Christ through the elements of bread and wine, in mind, he alludes to the physical sanctuary 
where Eucharistic prayer takes place, suggesting that it is “His mysterious, divine sanctuary” 
where Christ emerged to take human form.  A few centuries later, Germanus will develop 
this idea in his suggestion that the sanctuary represents the cave where Christ was born.  
What we can do, however, is appreciate the dialogue and dialectic taking place between 
these mystagogical texts and the physical structure of the church, even if we cannot fully 
know which came first.  Germanus’ mystagogical lectures provide one of the best examples 
in terms of what they say and how they are organized.  Unlike his predecessors, the lectures 
themselves are organized around the various physical spaces of the church as a building.  
Thus, for instance, Germanus begins his discussion of the physical sanctuary with an 
identification of it with the caves where Christ was born and buried.  He then proceeds to 
discuss the liturgical acts, namely the saying of the Eucharistic prayer, which take place in 
the sanctuary.  Indeed, it is almost the reversal of the passage from Ecclesiastical Hierarchy 
that was quoted above.  In his lectures, we can almost see the Patriarch as he leads us 
around Hagia Sofia, pointing out the various places and material artifacts used for the 
liturgy.  Paul Meyendorf argues that Germanus’ organization has much to do with the 
iconoclastic controversies that Germanus found himself embroiled in [6].  In an attempt to 
demonstrate the benefit of visual representations of Christ, Germanus is at pains to show 
ELETO – 7
th Conference ”Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
Athens, Greece, 22-24 October 2009 
13 
how these material representations can aide in a person’s contemplation and ascent into the 
spiritual.  In many ways, the physical church becomes the mneumonic devices described by 
the Greek and Roman rhetoricians.  In this case, the Roman noble house that the author of 
the Rhetorica ad Hernennium asks the student to visualize in order to locate and situate his 
ideas and text becomes the physical building of the church where the text or story of Christ 
is now inseparable from the material of the building.  
It is important to note that the interpretation that Germanus does bring is one that 
surprisingly synthesizes the development and interpretation of ἐκκλησία in the Gospels and 
Epistles with history and development of the church as gathering and as place where the 
gathering gathers.  We only need read Germanus’ very first line, where he declares 
“Ecclesía estí naós theou, témenos ágion, oíkos proseuches, sunáthrois laou, soma 
christou” (1984: 56 [4])  As I noted earlier, the Apostle Paul identifies ἐκκλησία as those who 
have been called out of the masses by responding to the voice of God.  Paul amplifies Jesus 
command that the body is the living temple of God to include both the individual members of 
the church and the church as a whole.  Moreover, because the church is the temple of God, 
it is also holy and is a house of prayer.  Finally, and most importantly, the church whose 
body is the temple of God is also the body of Christ.  Germanus clearly picks up on Paul’s 
theology; however, he integrates it with a more literal reading of naós which identifies it with 
the physical temple.  Thus, ta ecclesía becomes both the gathering of individuals and the 
place where those individuals gather, the physical naós or temple of God.  Because these 
individuals by virtue of the fact that they have bodies and by the Holy Spirit having entered 
them are the temples or dwelling places of God, the physical structure where they gather too 
becomes a temple of God.  This new temple, which draws upon the older Jewish temples, is 
by nature holy and, like the older Jewish temple, a house of prayer and, we may add, of 
sacrifice.  Yet, it cannot be completely identified with the older Jewish temples because it is 
also a place where the elect gather for study and instruction, a function that the Jewish 
tradition reserves for a different structure, the synagogue. Finally, by assuming the 
characteristics that Paul ascribes to the gathering who has been called out, the physical 
structure of the church, like its congregation, becomes the body of Christ.  In this manner, 
Germanus projects the τόποι which had gathered and become associated with the Pauline 
concept of ta ecclesía onto the physical structure of the church.  The physical structure now 
becomes a material place where these τόποι are represented for the clergy and laity to 
reflect, meditate, and develop.  
ELETO – 7
th Conference ”Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
Athens, Greece, 22-24 October 2009 
14 
3   Conclusion  
We might conclude this paper with a short discussion of the physical structure of the church.  
In his landmark study on hypermedia, J. David Bolter wryly notes that the medieval 
cathedrals might properly be considered the first types of hypertext.  His argument is that the 
cathedrals themselves were a type of text or even a series of text projected onto a physical 
structure.  By moving about them from room to room without any particular order, a person 
is able to experience them in the same way that he or she would a webpage or other form of 
hypermedia.  Carruthers makes a similar observation, though one not directly related to 
hypermedia, when she observes the cognitive effect that figurative spaces used in memory 
had on early Christians: 
The shape or foundation of a composition must be thought of as a place-where-
one-invents.  Everything is fitted onto it.  And as the composer, acting like a master 
builder or architectus, fits his tropes onto the foundation stones of a text, he must 
smooth, scrape, chip off, and in other ways adapt and “translate” the dicta et facta 
memorabilia he is using as his materials.  So the edifice of one’s life (so to speak), 
although created from stories available to all citizens, is also a fully personal 
creation, an expression (and creation) of one’s character.  This is plain in St. Paul’s 
injunction to be like a wise master-builder: the fire will try the quality of your work.  
(2006: 16 [1]) 
While these figurative spaces represented various aspects of a text, Carruthers reminds us 
that they were somewhat incomplete and thus capable of functioning as a heuristic when 
brought  into contact with the unique text of the individual.  We may say the same of the 
church as a material representation of the architectural τόποι.  Because of the visual quality 
of church buildings, the spaces themselves always elude easy translation.  In other words, 
there is nowhere within the physical sanctuary that says that it is the cave where Christ was 
born or where he was laid to rest.  In order to arrive at this interpretation that sees the 
physical sanctuary as representative of an important part of the story or text of Christ, 
Germanus must draw upon earlier writers, such as the author of the Ecclesiastical 
Hierarchy, as well as the sacrificial function of the room.  In short, the sanctuary as text is 
open for interpretation, though it does have parameters.  In many ways, this is consistent 
with cathedral architects who made every building gesture grand in order to accentuate the 
sublimity and ultimate unknowability of God. Like the ancient Greek temples with their 
imposing statues of the Gods, they were designed to convey a sense of awe that 
ELETO – 7
th Conference ”Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
Athens, Greece, 22-24 October 2009 
15 
communicated to the ancient priest and suppliant that only so much could be known and 
understood.  Had the cathedrals been constructed in such a way that their symbolic nature 
could easily be understood, I imagine that Carruthers would argue that they would evolve 
into text simply meant to be memorized in a rote manner, as though one set upon the 
impossible task of memorizing the Illiad word for word.  By becoming grand and sublime, 
they overpower us with a sense of awe that can then lead us towards textual invention in the 
same manner that Hagia Sofia must have led Germanus to produce his series of lectures.  
4   Bibliography 
[1]  Carruthers, Mary The Craft of Thought: Meditation, Rhetoric, and the Making of Images, 
400-1200. Cambridge University Press, 2006, pgs. 399. 
[2]  Dix, Dom Gregory.  The Shape of the Liturgy.  Simon Jones, 2005, pgs. 764. 
[3]  Interlinear Greek-English New Testament, 3rd Edition. Ed. Jay P. Green, Sr.  Baker 
Books, 1996, pgs. 794. 
[4]  Germanus.  On the Divine Liturgy. St. Vladimir University Press, 1984, pgs. 107. 
[5]  Krautheimer, Richard. Early Christian and Byzantine Architecture, Penguin, 1989, pgs. 
556. 
[6]  Meyendorf. Paul. “Introduction.” On the Divine Liturgy. Germanus. St. Vladimir 
University Press, 1984, 9-55. 
[7]  Plato.  Phaedrus.  Penguin Publishers, 2001. 
[8]  Wybrew, Hugh. The Orthodox Liturgy: The Development of the Eucharistic Liturgy in the 
Byzantine Rite. St. Vladimir University Press, 1989, pgs. 189.  
 
 
M. Todd Harper, PhD 
Associate Professor of English 
Kennesaw State University 
Kennesaw, GA, USA, 30120 
 
 
 
 
