SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/ELETO-EAFT_Conference_2013-11-07/ELETO-EAFT-Symposium-2013_Jordi%20Bover-and-%20Marta%20de%20Blas_CVs_EN.pdf

EAFT–ELETO Symposium 
“National Languages and Terminology  
in Higher Education, Science & Technology” 
Athens, Greece, 7 November 2013 
 
Jordi Bover i Salvadó and Marta de Blas 
 
Jordi Bover i Salvadó 
Director of TERMCAT, the Centre for Catalan Terminology, and secretary and treasurer of the 
European Association for Terminology. 
He holds a degree in Catalan Philology from the University of Barcelona. During the last ten 
year, as a head of the Terminology Projects dept. in TERMCAT, he has boosted the whole 
terminology production of the Centre. Projects like the Diccionari general de l’esport ('General 
Dictionary of Sport'), the Lèxic multilingüe de la indústria ('Multilingual Lexicon of Industry'), 
the Diccionari de neurociència (“Neuroscience Dictionary”) or the Terminologia i fraseologia 
dels productes informàtics ('Phraseology and Terminology of Computer Products') just to name 
a few, are launched under his coordination. In the international frame, he has also streamlined  
several dictionaries within the framework of the Pan-Latin Terminology Network (Realiter), 
such as the Vocabulari multilingüe de la sida ('Multilingual Vocabulary of AIDS') or the 
Vocabularí panllatí de les xarxes socials (' Panlatin Vocabulary of Social Networks'). 
He had previously been the secretary of TERMCAT Supervisory Council, which is the 
permanent corporate body responsible for standardising neologisms from the specialty lexicon 
in Catalan Language. 
Marta de Blas 
Head of the Language and Terminology Service at the Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya.  
The Language and Terminology Service (SLT) designs solutions for promoting, learning, using 
and ensuring the quality of languages. It is committed to the Catalan language and takes a 
proactive approach to the challenges posed by a multilingual, intercultural society. 
She holds a degree in Catalan Philology from the University of Barcelona and postgraduate 
qualifications in Terminology, Scientific Language, Language Planning, Hypermedia 
Publishing and Coaching.  
She has worked at the SLT since the end of the 1980s. She has been the head of its Language 
Advisory Unit and was in charge of the translation and revision service, writing resources and 
the UPC’s Style Guide.  She is the author of several specialised dictionaries, including the Solar 
Energy Dictionary and the Industrial Robotics Dictionary. She has contributed to language 
planning in the form of the UPC’s Language Quality Plan, the Language Policy Plan of the 
Vives University Network and the UPC’s Language Plan, which establishes the aims of the 
University’s multilingual language policy.  
