SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/ELETO-TE21-EDO_Conference/Gnosmata_Orologias_2018-11-08_EN_V01.pdf

KV/2018-11-08 
62 basic knowledge items of terminology 
Kostas Valeontis 
1. 
object: anything perceivable (by the human senses) or conceivable (by the human mind) at a given moment 
2. 
characteristic: mental abstraction of a property of a single object or a common property of a group of 
objects 
3. 
concept: unit of knowledge created by a unique combination of characteristics 
4. 
extension: totality of objects corresponding to a concept 
5. 
intension: set of characteristics that constitute a concept 
6. 
type of characteristic: category of characteristic that serves as the criterion of subdivision of concepts 
7. 
essential characteristic: characteristic indispensable to understanding a concept 
8. 
common/shared characteristic: characteristic indicating similarity of concepts and used to determine if an 
object belongs to the extension of a concept 
9. 
delimiting characteristic: essential characteristic used for distinguishing a concept from related concepts 
10. 
By adding delimiting characteristics in the intension  decreasing the number of objects in the extension. 
11. 
Based on the common characteristics two objects are included in the extension of the same concept, while 
based on the delimiting characteristics they are included in the extensions of different concepts 
12. 
individual concept: concept whose extension contains one object. Individual concepts are verbally 
represented by names or appellations 
13. 
general concept: concept whose extension contains more than one object General concepts are verbally 
represented by terms 
14. 
hierarchical relation: concept relation between two concepts A – B due to which A belongs to a higher level  
and B belongs to a lower level. A: superordinate concept, B: subordinate concept. Two subordinate 
concepts B1, B2 under the same superordinate concept A, with the same criterion of subdivision are: 
coordinate concepts. 
15. 
Main hierarchical relations between concepts A – B: generic relation (genus–species relation) and 
partitive relation (whole–part relation).  
16. 
In the generic relation: A: genaric concept, genus, B: specific concept, species.  
intension of B = intension of A + delimiting characteristic(s) 
17. 
In the partitive relation: A: comprehensive concept, the whole, B: partitive concept, the part 
18. 
associative relation: any concept relation which is not hierarchical relation 
19. 
sequential relation: associative relation based on spatial, temporal or other proximity and successiveness 
20. 
Sequential relations: spatial relation (relative location in space), temporal relation (events in time), causal 
relation (cause–effect relation). 
21. 
concept field: unstructured set of thematically related concepts 
22. 
concept system: set of concepts structured according to the concept relations among them 
23. 
Types of concept systems: generic concept system, partitive concept system, associative concept system, 
mixed concept system 
24. 
generic concept system: all concept relations in any vertical series of concepts are generic relations 
25. 
partitive concept system: all concept relations in any vertical series of concepts are partitive relations 
26. 
associative concept system: all concept relations in it are associative relations 
27. 
mixed concept system: all types of concept relations are used in it 
28. 
representation of a mental entity: rendition/depiction/presentation of the entity by perceptible (verbal, 
symbolic, graphical or other) means 
29. 
concept diagram: graphical representation of a concept system (generic relation  tree diagram, partitive 
relation  rake diagram, associative relation  arrow diagram) 
30. 
definition and designation: two representations of a concept in communication 
31. 
definition: descriptive representation of a concept (descriptive statement: written, oral or other) 
2 
32. 
intensional definition: definition which describes the intension of a concept (giving the superordinate 
concept and the limiting characteristic(s)) 
33. 
extensional definition: definition which enumerates all the subordinate concepts under one criterion of 
subdivision 
34. 
designation: conventional representation (verbal, symbolic or other) of a concept 
35. 
verbal designation of a concept: designation of a concept consisting of one or more words 
36. 
term: verbal designation of a general concept 
37. 
name, appellation: verbal designation of an individual concept 
38. 
symbol: a non verbal designation 
39. 
simple term / simple name: it contains only one root 
40. 
complex term / complex name: it contains more than one root 
41. 
blend: term formed by clipping and combining two separate terms 
42. 
compound name: complex name or blend designating an individual concept 
43. 
compound term: complex term or blend designating a general concept 
44. 
abbreviated form: it is formed by omitting parts of the full form of a designation, or it is a short independent 
form used as a synonym of the full form (dependent abbreviated form, independent abbreviated form) 
45. 
initialism: it is pronounced with the names of its letters, letter by letter (e.g. UN, USB) 
46. 
acronym: it is pronounced syllabically as a normal word (e.g. laser, UNESCO) 
47. 
short form: abbreviated form containing fewer words than the full form of a designation 
48. 
synonyms: terms (or names) representing the same concept in a given language 
49. 
equivalents: designations which represent the same concept in different languages 
50. 
mononymous concept: concept which is represented by only one designation in a given language 
51. 
omonymous concepts: unrelated concepts which are represented by the same designation in a given 
language 
52. 
monoseme: designation which represents only one concept in a given language 
53. 
polyseme: designation which represents two or more related concepts (concepts with certain common 
characteristics) in a given language 
54. 
principles for term formation (after ISO): transparency, consistency, appropriateness, linguistic economy, 
derivability and compoundability, linguistic correctness, preference for native language 
55. 
term-formation methods (after ISO): creating new forms, using existing forms, translingual borrowing 
56. 
term-formation mechanisms for Greek terms: creating new forms (derivation, compounding, abbreviation), 
using existing forms (conversion, terminogization, transdisciplinary borrowing, semantic transfer), 
translingual borrowing (direct borrowing, loan translation) 
57. 
The Analogue Rule: When forming a term in a language (target language) in order to name a new concept 
that has been primarily named in another language (source language), the namer’s first choice should be to 
apply a term-formation mechanism analogous to the term-formation mechanism used for the source 
language term 
58. 
term component: part of a term which is a term by itself or denotes a characteristic 
59. 
terminological analysis: analysis of a term into its term components 
60. 
immediate components: the two term components of a complex term which result from the first phase of the 
terminological analysis of the term: determined component, determining component 
61. 
determined component: the immediate component which expresses a genus of the concept designated by 
a complex term 
62. 
determining component: the immediate component which expresses a delimiting characteristic added to 
the intension of the genus (determined component) to denote a species. 
                                       
