SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/15th Conference/15thConference-PaperEditingInstructions-EN.pdf

ΕΛΕΤΟ 
ΕΛΛΗΝΙΚΗ ΕΤΑΙΡΕΙΑ ΟΡΟΛΟΓΙΑΣ 
HELLENIC SOCIETY FOR TERMINOLOGY 
 
15th Conference “Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
6–8 November 2025, Athens 
Information: Tel. +306974321009, E-mail: valeonti@otenet.gr 
 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR EDITING AND PRESENTING THE PAPER 
 
A. Editing 
 
1 
The text of the paper should be 3,000-4,000 words (10-12 pages) including the abstract, which 
should not exceed 200 words, and the bibliography; not counting any annexes, which should 
not exceed 2 pages. The text should be in .doc or .docx format and not .pdf (Word document 
compatible with previous versions of MS Office) in one of the two official languages of the 
Conference (Greek or English) and should be sent by e-mail to valeonti@otenet.gr no later than 
20 July 2025. 
2 
The font to be used is ARIAL 11 for the paper title, ARIAL 10 for the chapter titles, and ARIAL 9 
for the remaining text, with a spacing of 0 points before and a spacing of 6 points after each 
paragraph, while the line spacing will be 1,5. For abstracts, footnotes and bibliography, please 
use Arial 8. (If some parts of the text require characters from other fonts, see point 13.) 
3 
The entire text will be written in normal template, with no special formatting of headings (no 
styles). Footnotes may be used, but not endnotes.  
4 
Page setup should be as follows: 
Paper size: 
Α4 
Orientation: 
 Portrait 
 
Margins 
 
 
 
cm 
top 
 
2 
bottom 
 
8,5 
left 
 
2 
right 
 
6 
gutter 
 
0 
header 
 
1 
footer 
 
1 
 
5 
The first page should contain: 
 
a) the paper title in small letters (bold), centre aligned 
b) the name(s) of the author(s) in small letters (bold), centre aligned under the paper title, and 
separated by commas (no title or affiliation mentioned) 
c) the word ΠΕΡΙΛΗΨΗ/ABSTRACT in the language of the paper (Greek or English) 
d) the abstract text in the language of the paper (Greek or English), which should not 
exceed 200 words 
e) repetition of the above points a), b), c) and d) in the other official language of the 
Conference.  
 
6 
In case that the language of the paper and of the first abstract is in English, and the author, or 
one of the authors, speaks Greek, the second abstract shall be in Greek, and approximately 2 
E
Λ  
Ε  Τ Ο 
L 
E
 
2
pages long; also, a short English-Greek glossary should be added at the end as an Annex, 
containing the basic special terms of the paper. In case of difficulties with the equivalent Greek 
terms needed, the author is encouraged to contact ELETO for help. 
 
7 
The paper body should begin four spaces after the end of the second abstract or from a new 
page (2nd page).  
 
Section or paragraph headings should be in small letters (bold) and in normal template (not 
formatted as headings). 
 
8 
Page numbering (temporary) should be placed at the right top of the header on each page. 
 
9 
Section or paragraph numbering should follow the decimal system (if there is an introduction it is 
given the digit 0), with the respective headings being left aligned. 
 
10 
The transcription of Greek names (conversion of Greek characters to the Latin alphabet) should 
be conformant to the Greek Standard ELOT 743 (equivalent to the International Standard ISO 
843). 
 
11 
Bibliographic references and in-text citations shoud be written according to APA Style and 
grammar guidelines 7th edition. The bibliographic references section is titled Bibliography or 
Bibliographic References (in bold). 
 
12 
At the end of the paper, the following information about the author(s) should be indicated: name 
and surname, title or affiliation, and e-mail address. 
 
13 
In case that the text contains special fonts (special characters, symbols etc.) it should be saved 
(through WORD) with fonts embedded, by selecting: Word Options – Save – Embed fonts in 
the file. 
 
14 
As for the terminology to be used in the text of the paper, it is recommended to apply the 
International Standard on terminology ISO 1087:2019. The terms used in this standard, together 
with their Greek equivalents are contained in the English-Greek-French Glossary of terms and 
concept definitions of terminology (ELOT561, ISO1087-2019) 
 
B. Presentation 
15 
The presentation material of a paper (slides, tables, diagrams etc.) may be written in any of the 
two languages of the Conference. 
 
16 
In case that the language of the text of a paper is English, while the speaker, or one of the 
speakers, speaks Greek, his/her oral presentation should be in Greek. 
 
C. Curriculum vitae 
17 
The paper should be accompanied by a short CV of each of the authors, in Greek and/or in 
English, not exceeding 200 words. 
 
D. Registration for the Conference 
18 
Speakers are invited to complete their registration for the Conference after sending the final text 
no later than 31 July 2025 (registration form: rtf, pdf). 
 
 
 
 
3
Προβλήματα πρόσληψης της ορολογίας και θεωρίας στη μέση 
εκπαίδευση 
    
Καλλιόπη Πολυμέρου 
ΠΕΡΙΛΗΨΗ 
Η περίοδος της λυκειακής εκπαίδευσης είναι η κατάλληλη εποχή για να εισαχθούν οι μαθητές σε 
ζητήματα θεωρίας και ορολογίας. Η εμπειρική διαπίστωση ότι οι μαθητές δυσκολεύονται να 
χρησιμοποιούν και να αποκωδικοποιούν λόγο που περιέχει ορολογία φαίνεται να συνδέεται με 
ζητήματα γλωσσικά και συγκεκριμένα με τον τρόπο με τον οποίο εφαρμόζεται η γλωσσική διδασκαλία 
στην μέση ιδιαίτερα εκπαίδευση. Τα ζητήματα της γλώσσας και της διδασκαλίας της στη χώρα μας  
αποτέλεσαν συχνά θέματα επιστημονικών αλλά και λαϊκών συζητήσεων και αντεγκλήσεων με μόνιμο 
ζητούμενο το κατά πόσον αυτή η πλούσια πολιτιστική κληρονομιά θα μας βοηθήσει να κερδίσουμε ένα 
πλούσιο γλωσσικό όργανο. Παράλληλα, η εισβολή της εικόνας και η ραγδαία ανάπτυξη της 
εισαγόμενης τεχνολογίας έχουν περιαγάγει την ορολογία σε δυνάστη, με αποτέλεσμα όλο και 
περισσότεροι να συμβιβάζονται με αμετάφραστους και αγοραίους όρους.  
Problems of understanding terminology and theory in secondary 
education 
    
Kalliopi Polymerou 
ABSTRACT 
The period of upper secondary education is the right time to introduce students to issues of theory and 
terminology. The empirical conclusion that students find it difficult to use and decode speech that 
contains terminology, seems to be connected with language matters and specifically with the way 
language teaching is applied in secondary education. The issues of language and language teaching in 
our country were often matters of both scientific and popular debates and recriminations in a permanent 
challenge whether this rich cultural heritage will help us gain a rich language. At the same time the 
invasion of picture and the rapid growth of imported technology have made terminology seem like an 
oppressor. The result is more and more students being content with untranslated terms as well as  
terms imposed by the market.    
 
 
 
 
0. Εισαγωγή 
Η παρούσα εργασία είναι προϊόν διδακτικής εμπειρίας, ιδιαίτερα από τον χώρο της 
δημόσιας μέσης εκπαίδευσης, η οποία άλλωστε και αποτελεί κατά την άποψή μου για 
διάφορους λόγους το ‘κομβικότερο’ σημείο του εκπαιδευτικού μας συστήματος, και ιδιαίτερα 
An example of 1st page  
