SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/6th%20Conference/6th_26-14-SchoppJurgenPaper_V03.pdf

ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
 
1 
26   The European Translation Standard EN 15038 and it’s 
Terminology – A Mirror of Missing Professionalism? 
 
Jürgen F. Schopp 
ABSTRACT 
The European Standard EN 15038 Translation Services – Service Requirements, approved by CEN on 
April 13, 2006, has been given the status of a national standard in 29 European countries in November 
2006. The purpose of this standard is “to establish and define the requirements for the provision of 
quality services by translation service providers” and “to provide translation service providers with a set 
of procedures and requirements to meet market needs” (p. 7). 
With the help of the analysis of central terms and concepts such as ‘translate’, ‘translation process’, 
‘source text’, ‘target text’, ‘localisation’, ‘proofreading’, ‘style guide’ and ‘added value services’, I will 
demonstrate that EN 15038 is a compromise amongst the 29 translation cultures involved. It mirrors the 
semi-professional translational practices existing in many of these translation cultures and the 
commonly held misconceptions of the market about translation. This means that the terminology of 
translation used by translators themselves is the biggest obstacle in transforming the trade of translation 
into a genuine profession. This was exactly one of the goals the EN 15038 is set out to achieve. 
 
Το Ευρωπαϊκό Πρότυπο μετάφρασης EN 15038 και η ορολογία του – 
Καθρέφτης έλλειψης επαγγελματισμού ; 
 
Jürgen F. Schopp 
ΠΕΡΙΛΗΨΗ 
Το Νοέμβριο του 2006, 29 ευρωπαϊκές χώρες είχαν ήδη υιοθετήσει ως εθνικό πρότυπο το Ευρωπαϊκό 
πρότυπο EN 15038 Translation services – Service Requirements, που εγκρίθηκε από την CEN στις 13 
Απριλίου 2006. Σκοπός αυτού του προτύπου είναι «η καθιέρωση και ο ορισμός των προαπαιτήσεων για 
την παροχή ποιοτικών υπηρεσιών από παροχείς υπηρεσιών μετάφρασης» και «η διάθεση στους 
παροχείς υπηρεσιών ενός συνόλου διαδικασιών και προαπαιτήσεων ώστε να ανταποκριθούν στις 
ανάγκες της αγοράς» (σ. 7). 
Με την αρωγή της ανάλυσης βασικών όρων και εννοιών όπως «μεταφράζω», «μεταφραστική 
διαδικασία», «κείμενο αφετηρίας», «κείμενο αφίξεως», «τοπική προσαρμογή», «επιμέλεια κειμένων», 
«προδιαγραφές» και «υπηρεσίες προστιθέμενης αξίας» θα αποδείξω ότι το EN 15038 συμβιβάζει τις 29 
μεταφραστικές κουλτούρες που το υιοθέτησαν· αντανακλά τις ημιεπαγγελματικές μεταφραστικές 
πρακτικές σε πολλές από αυτές και την υφιστάμενη, λανθασμένη αντίληψη περί μετάφρασης της 
αγοράς. Αυτό σημαίνει ότι η ορολογία της μετάφρασης που χρησιμοποιούν οι ίδιοι οι μεταφραστές είναι 
το μεγαλύτερο εμπόδιο για την εξέλιξη της μετάφρασης σε πραγματικό επάγγελμα, σύμφωνα και με 
έναν από τους στόχους του EN 15038. 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
 
2 
 
1   The Translational Status quo 
The reality in the translation market seems quite confusing and inhomogeneous. There are 
different translation providers with different backgrounds and different working principles and 
concepts of ‘translation’ – in other words – with a more or less degree of professionalism. 
There is therefore a global tendency to set standards for translation services. One of these 
standards is the European Standard EN 15038 Translation Services – Service 
Requirements, approved by CEN on April 13, 2006. This set of standard has been given the 
status of a national standard by 29 European countries in November 2006 (EN 15038 
2006:5). The main purpose of this was “to improve the quality of translation services 
throughout Europe“ (Hübner 2007:13). However, there are also a number of other purposes. 
One was “to raise the profile of the translation industry by bringing it into line with other 
‘standardised’ industries and giving it a more professional image” (Hübner 2007:13; see also 
Enrique López-Ebri 2004:11). This can be understood by some means or other as accepting 
that translation practice is still quite far away from real professionalism and that the 
translation trade still cannot be seen as a real profession. 
Another purpose was “to meet market needs” (EN 15038 2006:7). This purpose has to be 
seen in contradiction to the other purposes because of the expectations and demands of the 
market such as cheap prices, often unrealistically short deadlines and delivery dates, 
combined with demands for high quality on the one hand and the principles (which often 
haven’t yet been fully realized) of professional action on the other hand. 
Thus when looking at the status quo of the translation market, a number of key questions 
arise: Do translators, clients, commissioners and users of translation products (‘the market’) 
understand the terms ‘translation’ and ‘translate’ in the same way? How do translators 
practice their profession? Is it really professional or is it rather semi-professional? What do 
practicing translators (and translation scholars) understand by the term ‘professional’? How 
do other (the so called) “real” professions define ‘professional’ for themselves? 
Looking closer at the market, there is a growing tendency for global activity of the translation 
industry, among them the so called ‘envelop switchers’ – smart business people who are 
buying cheap translation services from freelance translators and selling them to their clients 
without any quality control. In this way, translators are increasingly becoming academic 
slaves of the translation industry paid per word or character. 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
 
3 
The main reasons for the status quo are misconceptions about ‘translation’ among clients, 
commissioners and users of translations and also misconceptions about ‘translation’ and 
‘professionalism’ among practising translators and translation scholars. The governing 
customs are often not very professional – translation as a profession is still in the developing 
process. 
 
2   Different Concepts of ‘Translation’ and the Professional Translation 
Process 
Among practitioners as well as translation scholars, the term ‘translation’ is used to mean 
differing things: (1) the systematic substitution of elements from two language systems 
(‘language translation’ or ‘linguistic translation’); (2) the intercultural communicative action 
per se; (3) the production of only the verbal form of the text in the target language, often 
practiced by translation teachers themselves as a job on the side, and finally (4) the complex 
professional process of producing a communication tool which transfers a message in 
(primarily public) intercultural communications. 
To understand the translated text as a communication tool as such, we must consider that 
every text consists of several levels: (1) the communicative structure (tectonics), (2) the 
verbal content (texture) and (3) the visual form (see Schopp 1996). This last characteristic 
has traditionally been called typography when the text was distributed in printed form (see 
picture 1). To this we must nowadays also include texts which are published in electronic 
mode (WWW, CD-ROM, DVD, etc.). 
 
 
 
 
Picture 1:   
The TT+T-Model (see Schopp 2005:61) 
 
 
 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
 
4 
 
Often the ‘translation process’ has been seen as a purely formulating process of the target 
text, in other words, as a mere verbal operation based on the text analysis of the source text 
and not on a holistic analysis of the commission. But in recent times, translators have been 
faced more than ever with issues related to typography and layout. Text-processing and 
desktop publishing software are now part of the daily routine of almost all translators. The 
use of such software has resulted in a new type of translation product – the ready-to-print or 
ready-to-publish translation (see Schopp 2002:271). The fact is that translators nowadays 
are being required to take over functions that previously were the responsibility of trained 
experts in typography. So translators must deal with typography and layout in several parts 
of the translation process. Source texts are usually in printed (i.e. typographic) mode. Target 
texts (translations) in most cases will be published either traditionally as a printed document 
or often nowadays as a digital, or electronic document. Thus in many cases nowadays the 
translator is also producing the visual form of the text (typography, layout). 
In my opinion, every translation process begins with the request of the client. After the 
analysis of the task, the cost calculation, the offer, the confirmation of the order and the 
contract – Mackenzie (2004:162f) calls this “pre-translation” – follows the production of the 
verbal form of the target text (including text analysis, terminological work, revision, etc).  
One central question is the scope of the translation service. The translator has to know 
whether the translation is an intermediate product which gets its final shape with the help of 
other text experts (editor, graphic designer, typographer etc.) or whether it is an end product 
which will be received by the addressee in just the same mode as the translator handed it in 
(corresponding to the scope between ‘rough’ and ‘ready for publication’).  
One very important but often forgotten part of the whole production process is the final 
proofreading by the client so as to get his/her approval to begin the printing process. If the 
target text or the print medium consisting the target text is produced in the source culture, 
then this should be done by the translator because usually only he/she knows (or should 
know) the typographic conventions of the target culture, the correct spelling of words and 
names, the correct word divisions etc. 
Finally follows the billing and other post-translation stages including drawing conclusions to 
improve the quality system (see Mackenzie 2004:167).  
 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
 
5 
3   EN 15038 – an Attempt to Raise the Profile of Professional Translation? 
As mentioned above, one central purpose of EN 15038 was to raise the profile of 
professional translation. But the questions are the following: To what extend will this 
standard help translators to become better professionals and to work more professionally? 
To what extent may the adaptation to “market orientation” consolidate the commonly held 
misconceptions about translation? 
In a real profession, the individuals are experts who are better informed and more 
knowledgeable than the client. They do not merely fulfil the client’s or customer’s wishes; but 
they analyse the whole situation, advising the client about what type of product is best for 
his/her needs, which characteristics should the product have or what is or is not feasible 
under the actual specific circumstances. Real professionals have something what could be 
defined as ”know-how margin”. In other words: In a real profession there is a ”know-how 
gap” between the expert and the client. 
Many translators, however, do not (or cannot) think and work independently. They are 
trained to only carry out the client’s wish without reflecting on the actual task – how 
unrealistic these may be. These translators apply not carefully thought out working principles 
e.g. preparing a translation which is to be published into the B-working language without 
getting it checked and/or edited by a native speaker text expert. They have a limited 
comprehension of the scope of the translation process and regard it as a mere linguistic 
action (for example when referring to “language mediation”). These translators work more 
like linguistic encoding modems instead of experts of intercultural communication. And last 
but not least, they show insufficient solidarity with the profession through dumping prices 
(Prunč 2003:86: “Dumping spiral”). These are not characteristics of a real profession. 
Asking now what is the level of professionalism in translation practice? The answer is as 
following: Many translators and in part also translation companies are working more in a 
semi-professional rather than a professional manner. Thus the purpose of EN 15038 to 
develop a real professional translation trade is well motivated.  
But to fulfil this purpose, the concepts of EN 15038 should be based on ideas about 
professional translation. This doesn’t yet seem to have been accepted by many of the 29 
European countries involved in formulating the text of the European standard. And the 
terminology used in the standard should be free of contradictions and the terms used should 
be defined clearly and unambiguously. 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
 
6 
 
4   Key Concepts and Terms in EN 15038 
The central concept and term in EN 15038 is ‘translate’, defined as “render information in 
the source language … into the target language … in written form.” (EN 15038 2006:11). As 
long as ‘information’ is not defined in the standard, it is not clear whether it means the verbal 
content or the meaning of the source text or perhaps both together. Looking closer at the 
description of the translation process, it becomes evident that ‘information’ is used as a 
synonym for ‘meaning’: “The translator shall transfer the meaning in the source language 
into the target language in order to produce a text that is in accordance with the rules of the 
linguistic system of the target language …” (EN 15038 2006:19). This is still a mere 
traditional concept of ‘translate’ and ‘translation’ which limits the professional action of the 
translator to a “linguistically correct transfer” (Snell-Hornby 2000:72) – a fact which also 
mirrors in the concept of ‘translation service’ versus ‘added value service’. 
From a terminological viewpoint it is questionable to use the term ‘translation’ as a hyponym 
and ‘translation process’ as a hypernym. Because in both cases ‘translation’ is used in a 
different meaning. In point 5.4 (Translation process) as the holistic process to get a target 
culture print medium and at the same time in point 5.4.1 (Translation) as the part of the 
‘translation process’ in which the target text will be formulated (‘translation’ in the same 
range as ‘checking’, ‘revision’, ‘review’, ‘proofreading’, and ‘final verification’). 
Thus the main feature the translator shall pay attention to are terminology, grammar, lexis, 
style, local conventions and regional standards (“locale”), formatting, and at least target 
group and purpose of the translation (EN 15038 2006:19 & 21). No word about the possible 
necessity to add or to omit verbal information, or to formulate a target text on the base of 
source culture material. No word about the communicative function of translation to build “a 
text that transmits a certain message” (Mackenzie 2004:158). 
And another point: Talking about “source text” and “target text” (without defining what ‘text’ 
means) is like not taken into account that a text never exists without a physical medium. It 
always appears whether in an aural or visual mode (handwritten, machine written, printed or 
in digital-electronic mode, sometimes as ‘cross-media’ in both modes). The typography of a 
text cannot be taken for granted. It is often the result of a special design process carried out 
by experts. 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
 
7 
There are indeed some typographical phenomena listed in Annex D (“Style guide”), but not 
systematically – the whole annex is an unsystematic mixture of verbal and visual 
phenomena. It would be more professional to make a distinction between the 
verbal/linguistic and the visual/typographic dimension of the translation. 
It should also be mentioned that ‘orthotypography’ is named as a part of grammar beside 
spelling, punctuation and diacritical marks (see EN 15038 2006:19). This phenomenon 
shows another difficulty of the standard and its translations. While in the English version of 
the EN, the term ‘orthotypography’ is used (EN 15038 2006:19), in the Finnish version the 
term ‘typografiset konventiot’ is used (SFS EN 15038:18), which in English means 
‘typographic conventions’. This, however, does not precisely mean the same as 
‘orthotypography’. The term ‘typographic conventions’ refers to the culture-specific use of 
typographical elements. The term ‘orthotypography’, on the other hand – seen from the 
viewpoint of readability – means the correct use of typographic signs. In the German 
version, the term ,Rechtschreibung‘ is used (DIN EN 15038:11), which in English means 
‘orthography’. Again, this does not mean exactly the same as ‘orthotypography’ 
(‘orthography’ refers to the graphic level in general whereas ‘orthotypography’ refers to the 
typographic level). This is a proof of the tendency in the standard to use words which 
meaning is not perfectly understood.  
Failing to distinguish between the verbal and the visual dimension of the translation is a 
weak point of the Translation Standard.  Yet another far reaching weak point of the 
Translation Standard is deliberately making a distinction between ‘translation services’ and 
‘added value services’.  
From the viewpoint of the traditional translation, it is understandable to show the client that 
translation is more than just transferring words from one language to another. But from a 
modern translatological aspect and seen with the purpose to develop a real translational 
profession, this is not an optimal solution. The Austrian translation standard – hitherto the 
most progressive and professional translation standard I know of – defines text procedures 
like ‘adaptation’, ‘rewriting’, ‘localisation’, ‘technical writing’ and others as typical services of 
the translator („Transferleistung“, ÖNORM D1200 2000:4). Defining these in EN 15038 
(2006:31) as ‘Added Value Services’, this standard shows clearly the restricted 
understanding of the tasks of a professional translator and strengthens the public picture 
about translation as an act of pure linguistic transfer/transcoding. 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
 
8 
But also a number of other concepts and terms show the semi-professionalism of EN 15038. 
On the one hand Annex E gives a non-exhaustive list of ‘added value services’, besides the 
already named e.g. ‘DTP, graphic and web design’. On the other hand the standard 
demands that the translator should be able to offer for added value services “the same level 
of quality to those services as to the services covered by this standard” (EN 15038 2006:21). 
Again there is a contradiction: Most translators are not able to do this because they do not 
have professional competence in this services –, let alone knowledge about the typographic 
conventions of the source culture … Thus how can they offer DTP, graphic design and web 
design without professional competence, based on a special training? 
And what is meant by defining “proofreading” as “checking of proofs before publishing”? (EN 
15038 2006:9). Under some circumstances (for example, when the specific print media for 
the target culture is produced in the source culture), this service should always be a part of 
the translation process and the translator should insist upon getting the proofs. But is it that 
what is meant by “proofreading” in the EN 15038? ‘Proofreading’ is a fuzzy term used for 
different stages in the production process of a printed or in electronic mode published 
medium. So “checking of proofs before publishing” could be understood as “checking that 
the text has the verbal quality which a published text should have”. But it could also (and in 
this context should) mean “last checking of the proofs through the client and/or the translator 
before beginning the printing process”. Another question is: Is the translator att all apt to 
proofread a translation or publication both orthographically and orthotypographically? The 
description of the “professional competences of translators” (EN 15038 2006:13) do not 
enumerate such knowledge and skills. And many printed translations show that these things 
are not yet applied by all translators.  
 
5. EN 15038 – A Mirror of Semi-Professionalism 
This all shows that terms and concepts in the European Translation Standard EN 15038 are 
clearly based on the semi-professionalism of the translation trade at this moment. 
The European standard on translation services cannot be seen as a way to full 
professionalism in the field of translation, since it is based on a too limited understanding of 
‘translation’ and ‘translation process’ and further more shows an ignorance of the whole 
production process of a publication or medium. In addition to this the standard contains a 
number of not clearly defined terms.  
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
 
9 
The standard must be seen as a compromise between the 29 translation cultures involved of 
which a bigger part does not yet follow real professional working principles. It shows the 
non-homogeneity of the profession and the semi-professional working principles of 
practising translators as much as the semi-professionalism of “added value services” like 
graphic design and web design.  
And what is worse: The standard assigns the translator the passive role of being an 
academically trained assistant for bilingual writing often undervalued and underpaid – and 
not somebody who is an expert in intercultural communication. Therefore EN 15038 is 
lacking in comparison to the much more professional ÖNORM D 1200 standard. 
It is to be feared that the standard adapting to “market orientation” may consolidate more the 
existing commonly held misconceptions about translation rather than stop the ongoing 
global development to make translators “word slaves” of a translation industry that does not 
really work in professional manner. Against this background, EN 15038 is more a mirror of 
the semi-professionalism of the translation trade today than the right way to develop full 
professionalism. 
 
Bibliography 
[1] 
DIN EN 15038 (2006): Übersetzungs-Dienstleistungen – 
Dienstleistungsanforderungen; Deutsche Fassung EN 15038:2006. Berlin: Deutsches 
Institut für Normung. 
[2] 
EN 15038 (2006): Translation services – Service requirements. Brussels: European 
Committee for Standardization.  
[3] 
 Hübner, Manuela (2007): The new standard for translation services. ITI bulletin 
January-February 2007, 12–13. 
[4] 
López-Ebri, Enrique (2004): Europäische Einigung über die Qualitätssicherung und 
Zertifizierung von Übersetzungsdienstleistungen. MDÜ 6/2004, 10–12. 
[5] 
Mackenzie, Rosemary (2004): “Functional translation theory and quality in translation: 
An interface between theory and practice”. In: Jorma Tommola (ed.), Language, Text 
and Translation, Turku: Turun yliopisto, 157–168. 
[6] 
Önorm D 1200 (2000): Dienstleistungen – Übersetzen und Dolmetschen. Über- 
setzungsleistungen. Anforderungen an die Dienstleistung und an die Bereitstellung 
der Dienstleistung. Hrsg. vom Fachnormenausschuss 239. Wien: Österreichisches 
Normungsinstitut. 
[7] 
Prunč, Erich (2003): “Óptimo, subóptimo, fatal: Reflexiones sobre la democracia 
etnolingüística en la cultura europea de traducción.” In: Dorothy Kelly & Anne Martin 
& Marie-Louise Nobs & Dolores Sánchez & Catherine Way (eds.). La direccionalidad 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
 
10
en Traducción e Interpretación: perspectivas teóricas, profesionales y didácticas. 
Granada: Editorial Atrio, 67–89. 
[8] 
Schopp, Jürgen F. (1996): “The typographic competence of the translator – Visual 
text design and desktop publishing.” In: XIV World Congress of the Fédération 
Internationale des Traducteurs (FIT), February 1996, Melbourne, Australia. 
Proceedings volume 1, 189-195.  
[9] 
Schopp Jürgen F. (2002): “Typography and Layout as a Translation Problem.” – In: 
Translation: New Ideas for a New Century. Proceedings of the XVI FIT World 
Congress Vancouver, B.C., Canada 7 – 10 August, 2002; 271–276. 
[10] 
Schopp, Jürgen F. (2005): »Gut zum Druck«? – Typographie und Layout im 
Übersetzungsprozeß. Acta Universitatis Tamperensis 1117. Tampere: Tampere 
University Press. WWW-Version: http://acta.uta.fi/pdf/951-44-6465-6.pdf 
[11] 
SFS-EN 15038 (2006): Käännöspalvelut. Palveluvaatimukset. Helsinki: Finnish 
Standards Association. 
[12] 
Snell-Hornby, Mary (2000): “Some Concluding Comments on the Responses.” In: 
Christina Schäffner (ed.): Translation in the Global Village. Clevedon: Multilingual 
Matters, 2000, 69–72. 
 
Dr. Jürgen F. Schopp 
Senior lecturer in Translation Studies (Finnish-German) 
School of Modern Languages and Translation Studies 
University of Tampere 
FI-33014 Tampereen yliopisto, Finland 
Email: jurgen.schopp@uta.fi 
http://www.uta.fi/~trjusc/ 
 
 
 
 
 
