SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/TermBases/TE21_History-EN.pdf

Τ.Ε.Ε. ΕΛΟΤ
ΤΕ21 
ΕΛΕΤΟ 
Technical Committee ELOT/TC 21 
Terminology – Language resources 
Collective Member of ELETO  
 
Chairperson: M. Pantazara, mavinap@frl.uoa.gr 
E 
Λ  
Ε  Τ  Ο 
L 
E 
 
August 2022 
 
Technical Committee ELOT/TC 21 Terminology – Language resources 
 
 
After the foundation of the Hellenic Organization for Standardization (ELOT), in 1978, the Technical 
Committee ELOT/TC 21 Terminology – Language resources (initial name: Technical Terminology) was 
established, at the initiative of the Technical Chamber of Greece (TEE), ever since having undertaken the 
committee’s technical and secretarial support. The terms of reference of ELOT/TC 21 is to be the national 
mirror committee to the international Technical Committee ISO/TC 37 Language and terminology. 
ELOT/TC 21 attends ISO/TC 37’s work and contributes with constructive comments to the International 
Standards prepared by the latter. 
ELOT/TC 21 is a founding Collective Member of the Hellenic Society for Terminology (ELETO), whose 
delegates actively participate in the work of the committee. 
Current members of the Committee: 
Members and deputy members 
Observers/Experts 
Mavina Pantazara, Chairperson 
Katerina Toraki, former Chairperson 
Kostas Valeontis 
Maria Gavriilidou 
Dionysis Giannibas 
Dionysis Goutsos 
Valentini Kalfadopoulou 
Vangelis Kamariotakis 
Marianna Katsoyannou 
Vivian Kleideri 
Charalampos Koutroulis 
Panagiotis G. Krimpas 
Georgia Kyriakakou 
Stella Markantonatou 
Dimitris Moutafis 
Marina Pantazidou 
Giannis Saridakis 
Anna Stefanidou 
George Tsiamas 
Angeliki Fotopoulou 
Anastasia Christofidou 
 
Haris Ghinos 
Effie Frangou 
Despina Lamprou 
Christina Nikitopoulou 
Dimitris Charvatis 
To date, ELOT/TC 21 has prepared 11 Hellenic Standards, corresponding to International Standards of 
ISO/TC 37; as well as one primarily Greek standard: ELOT 1455:2017 Greek initialisms and acronyms 
formation. In 1981–1982, ELOT/TC 21 prepared and published the Hellenic Standards ELOT 402 and 
ELOT 561 corresponding to ISO 704 and ISO 1087 respectively, the basic standards of terminology 
principles and methods. The content of these standards was analysed in a special publication of ELOT: 
Analysis of basic principles of technical terminology), which also includes the first glossaries (Greek-English, 
English-Greek) of terminology terms. Recently, these standards have been republished as Hellenic 
Standards ELOT 402:2010 and ELOT 561-1:2006, with special contribution from ELETO. 
The terminology terms of the standards prepared by ELOT/TC 21 are being collected, by the ELETO’s 
delegate in the committee, Kostas Valeontis, into the termbase TERMTERM, today containing 3.147 entries. 
A major part of this content has been inserted into the “international” termbase TermTerm, after an 
agreement signed between ELETO and TermNet. 
