SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/TermBases/LEXITERM_History-EN.pdf

  Ε  Λ   Ο   Τ    Ε    
Μ 
Ο 
Τ 
Ο 
 
LEXITERM: 
Database of telecommunication terms 
Resulting from the work of the Permanent Group 
of Telecommunications Terminology (MOTO), 
Collective Member of ELETO 
(Quadrilingual Dictionary of telecom terminology)  
E 
Λ  
Ε  Τ  Ο 
L 
E 
August 2022 
 
Short history of the Termbase LEXITERM 
 
 
As a collective member of ELETO, the Permanent Group of Telecommunications Terminology (MOTO) 
prepared the Greek terms of the “Quadrilingual Dictionary of Telecommunication Terminology – English, 
German, French, Greek”, J. P. Rehahn & ELETO, Glossima editions, 1995.  
The database of telecommunication terms LEXITERM was created in 1995 by the leader of the Permanent 
Group for Telecommunication Terminology (MOTO), Kostas Valeontis, as a dBASE III-Plus database, while 
in 1999 it was converted by him into an MS Access 97 database; today it is an MS Access 2000 database. 
Initially, all the English terms of the Quadrilingual Dictionary were imported into LEXITERM and later, the 
Greek equivalent terms were imported, as their processing by MOTO was proceeding during the project. At 
the end of the project of publishing the Quadrilingual Dictionary, the termbase was already bilingual (English, 
Greek). Then, since MOTO had seen that in the column of the French term many entries contained quasi 
synonyms instead of full synonyms – that is not permitted in a dictionary of terminology where each entry 
should belong to one and only one concept and any synonyms are full synonyms –  MOTO examined a 
number of the French equivalent terms keeping only the full synonyms. So, the French language was added, 
and a number of entries contain a French equivalent term, the termbase being trilingual.  
The development, operation, maintenance and feeding of LEXITERM was performed by the leader of MOTO 
himself, who has also the responsibility for the content in the website. 
The field structure of the Termbase LEXITERM comprises the following basic fields (which, in each entry, 
correspond to a single concept): 
BASIC FIELDS OF LEXITERM  
English term 
English abbreviation 
Greek term 
Greek abbreviation 
French term 
French abbreviation 
Foreign language reference source 
Greek language reference source 
Stage of processing 
 
Today, the termbase LEXITERM contains 16.626 terminological entries of telecommunications. 
 
NOTE 
In case that, for the same telecommunications concept, there are different Greek terms in 
the termbase TELETERM and in the termbase LEXITERM, the term in TELETERM 
prevails, because since 1995 and afterwards, the relevant term has been revised by 
MOTO. For example:  
LEXITERM (1995): bit  δυαδικό ψηφίο 
TELETERM (Now):  bit  δυφίο. 
 
 
