SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/ELETO-EAFT_Conference_2013-11-07/ELETO-EAFT-Symposium-2013_Kostas%20Valeontis_Opening%20speech_EN.pdf

EAFT–ELETO Symposium 
“National Languages and Terminology  
in Higher Education, Science & Technology” 
Athens, Greece, 7 November 2013 
 
English translation of the 
Opening speech of Kostas Valeontis, President of ELETO 
 
Dear friends, 
–  from EAFT 
–  from other European countries 
–  from Greece 
 
In any state, the national language is the highest common social and cultural property. On 
one hand, it is the common code of communication among private citizens, among scientists, 
as well as between private citizens and scientists; on the other hand, by its functional 
structure and terminology, it is the vehicle for conveying and transferring knowledge to the 
new scientists who disseminate it – via application and education – to wider social strata. 
New knowledge is acquired and consolidated in Higher Education, Research and 
Technology. National Higher Education Institutions are committed to teaching this knowledge 
in the national language. These activities are financed by the taxpaying citizens of a state 
and should be carried out to their benefit; they should satisfy the citizens’ right to acquire new 
knowledge in the language which they speak and by which they communicate. Moreover,, 
depriving the national language of its capability to describe and transfer new knowledge is a 
serious harm to the language itself resulting to its progressive estrangement from the 
developing domains and eventually its shrinkage. 
ELETO’s main objective is terminology – i.e. the interface between knowledge and language 
– and specifically the Greek terminology; and its action line is to adopt Greek terms 
equivalent to the new foreign language terms as soon as possible. Thus, ELETO 
immediately embraced the EAFT’s initiative (with Jan Roukens in a leading role) to organize 
this event. I wish that this Symposium be quite successful and contribute substantially to the 
claim of national languages that they should participate actively and equally in contemporary 
scientific and technical discourse. 
 
