SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/3rd%20Conference/3rd_18-Ribeiro-Paper3_V02.pdf

ΕΛΕΤΟ – 3ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 1-3 Νοεμβρίου 2001 
199 
 
BUILDING BILINGUAL TERMINOLOGY DATABANKS FOR GREEK  
FROM PARALLEL TEXTS 
António Ribeiro, Gabriel Lopes and João Mexia 
 
In this paper we present a method of building bilingual terminology databanks for Greek from parallel 
corpora. Parallel texts are good sources of information to obtain the translations of bilingual terminology. 
They provide the usual ways terms are used in different languages. This work uses parallel corpora 
from the Official Journal of the European Communities in English, Greek and Portuguese in order to 
extract translations of terminology. The method starts by aligning the parallel texts and extracting 
terminology found in those texts. Then, translations of terms are identified by analysing the similarity of 
the distribution of the extracted terms in the aligned corpora. We show some results given by this 
promising way of accomplishing this task. 
 
1. 
Introduction 
 
Bilingual terminology databanks are useful resources either for machine translation, cross-
language information retrieval or even for human translators themselves. They provide 
domain specific terms which have typical translations in other languages. However, 
terminology databanks are not available for every domain. Furthermore, their manual 
compilation is quite time consuming and requires much human effort. 
Parallel texts are good sources of information to obtain translations of terminology and are 
becoming ever more widely available. Parallel texts are texts which are mutual translations. 
For example, the European Commission produces daily hundreds of pages of legislative 
texts in the eleven official languages of the European Union1. 
Still, before it may be possible to identify translations of words or terms automatically, it is 
necessary to make correspondences between the pieces of text in the different languages. 
This process is called alignment. Since translations of terms are not necessarily done word 
by word, multiword terms should be extracted from the parallel corpora. It is possible to do 
so using statistical techniques. 
In this paper, we present a method to extract translations of terms in order to compile a 
bilingual terminology databank from parallel texts in English, Greek and Portuguese. Some 
previous work has already been done on alignment of parallel texts and extraction of 
translation equivalents, specially using English as one of the languages but not much with 
Greek. Greek presents a further challenge compared to other Western European languages: 
                                                          
1 Danish, Dutch, English, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Italian, Portuguese, Spanish and Swedish. 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 3ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 1-3 Νοεμβρίου 2001 
200 
it has a different alphabet. Even if one takes advantage of a possible conversion of the 
character set (e.g. ‘α‘ to ‘a’, ‘β’ to ‘b’, and so forth), it still poses some interesting problems 
for bilingual research because it is a highly inflectional language. Thus, it is a good language 
that makes possible to assess how language independent language methodologies can be. 
This paper is structured as follows: we begin by giving a general overview over previous 
work in the next section. In section 3, we present the parallel corpus that was used. Section 
4 describes briefly the technique used to extract terms. Sections 5 and 6 discuss the aligner 
and how translations of terms are identified. We present some results in section 7. Finally, 
we draw some conclusions in section 8 and discuss future work in section 9. 
 
2. 
Previous Work 
 
Early work on parallel texts alignment was performed at sentence level counting words or 
characters (see [1] and [4]). The algorithms grouped sequences of sentences till they had 
proportional sizes. In [5], two sentences were aligned if the number of correspondence 
points associating them was greater than a threshold. The sentence aligner used a bilingual 
dictionary derived from previous alignments which is progressively refined as the alignment 
proceeds. In [12], the use of cognates enhanced the alignment results. Cognates, which are 
similar words like Parliament and Parlement in English and French respectively, provide 
more and better clues for alignment models. [7] also recurred to cognates in order to define 
correspondence points. These correspondence points were subsequently filtered if they laid 
outside an empirically defined search space. 
The requirement for clear sentence boundaries was dropped in [3] for alignment of English–
Chinese parallel texts. For the English texts, terms were extracted by matching pre-selected 
syntactic regular expressions, typical of noun phrases, to tagged text. Translations of terms 
were then identified comparing vectors that stored distances between consecutive 
occurrences of terms (DK-vec’s) using dynamic time warping. 
[6] presents a methodology to align Greek–English parallel texts at sentence, lexical and 
word level using shallow linguistic processing and statistical models. Translations of noun 
phrase terms are extracted from sentence aligned parallel texts using syntactic patterns. 
However, they also acknowledge problems concerning sentence identification and sentence 
delimiters ([6], p. 123). This was also one of the early problems in [1] and [4]. 
In the following sections we present a methodology to identify translations of terms based on 
statistical approaches. It is a language independent methodology that does not require a 
priori language knowledge and which does not recur to heuristics. 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 3ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 1-3 Νοεμβρίου 2001 
201 
 
 
3. 
Source Parallel Texts 
 
We worked with a parallel corpus selected at random from the Official Journal of the 
European Communities [2] and from The Court of Justice of the European Communities2 in 
English, Greek and Portuguese. For each language, we included: 
• 
five texts with Written Questions asked by members of the European Parliament to the 
European Commission and their corresponding answers (average: about 60k words or 
100 pages / text); 
• 
five texts with records of the Debates in the European Parliament (average: about 400k 
words or more than 600 pages / text); 
• 
five texts with judgements of The Court of Justice of the European Communities 
(average: about 3k words or 5 pages / text). 
The table below shows the number of words per sub-corpus. The average number of tokens 
per text is inside brackets3. ‘el’ stands for Greek, ‘en’ for English and ‘pt’ for Portuguese. 
Language
Written Questions
Debates
Judgements
Total
el
272k (54k)
1,9M (387k)
16k (3k)
2222k
en
263k (53k)
2,1M (417k)
16k (3k)
2364k
pt
284k (57k)
2,1M (416k)
17k (3k)
2381k
Total
819k (55k)
6,1M (407k)
49k (3k)
6967k
 
 
4. 
Extraction of Terms 
In order to identify multiword terms in the several languages, we have used a methodology 
proposed in [11]. This methodology is based on the idea that the more cohesive a group of n 
words is, the higher its cohesiveness score is. The algorithm assumes that the score of a 
good multiword unit must be a local maximum, i.e. the cohesion of the set of n words is 
higher than any subset of n–1 words contained in it and higher than the cohesion of any 
superset of n+1 words which contains it. Thus, the algorithm is able to select, for example, 
‘common rules and standards’ as a relevant multiword term instead of ‘common rules and’ or 
of ‘common rules and standards for’ because the scores of these multiword units are lower. 
The methodology has proved to be quite adequate to be used across several languages. In 
this way, we are able to capture multiword terms for each language. 
 
                                                          
2 http://curia.eu.int. 
3 html markups were discarded since they would provide extra clues to the aligner, biasing the results. 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 3ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 1-3 Νοεμβρίου 2001 
202 
5. 
Alignment of Parallel Texts 
To make correspondences between the texts in English, Greek and Portuguese, we took 
advantage of clues in the parallel texts that help identify what piece of text in one language 
should correspond to in the other language. 
The text aligner looks at words which are identical for a pair of languages, at numbers, 
punctuation and even at the outline of documents (paragraph structure, lists of items). 
Although we could have made the conversion of the Greek letters to the Latin character set, 
we decided not to do so at this stage in order to check how far our methodology could go 
using simple strategies. For average size texts (e.g. the Written Questions), the number of 
common words accounts for about 4% of the total number of words (about 2k words / text). 
These words end up being mainly numbers and names. 
Here are a few examples from a Greek–English parallel text: 1998 (numbers, dates), Eureka 
(acronyms), Greenpeace (names of organisations, proper names) and Poitiers (names of 
cities). A sample of an alignment of a Greek–Portuguese parallel text is shown below: 
Greek 
Portuguese
Όσον αφορά το καθεστώς του ευρωπαίου 
πολίτη , το άρθρο 8 , παράγραφος 
No que respeita ao estatuto do cidadão 
europeu , o n º 
1 
1
, του σχεδίου της Συνθήκης για την 
Ευρωπαϊκή Ένωση προβλέπει ότι 
do artigo 8 º do Projecto de Tratado da 
União Europeia prevê que 
« 
«
πολίτης της Ένωσης είναι κάθε πρόσωπο 
που έχει την υπηκοότητα ενός κράτους 
μέλους 
é cidadão da União qualquer pessoa que 
tenha a nacionalidade de um Estado – 
membro 
» . ¶ ( 1 ) 
» . ¶ ( 1 )
Η Επιτροπή λυπάται για την καθυστερημένη 
απάντησή της 
A Comissão lamenta o atraso com que esta 
resposta é dada 
. ( 2 ) SEC ( 91 ) 1855 
. ( 2 ) SEC ( 91 ) 1855
τελικό 
final 
The characters in bold highlight the tokens used as correspondence points for the alignment 
of the texts. The positions of these tokens in the texts are used as the co-ordinates of 
correspondence points, i.e. the aligner uses the byte number of the tokens in the text as co-
ordinates. The byte number is the offset of the token from the beginning of the file measured 
in number of bytes. If we plot the correspondence points on a graph, we tend to get a well-
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 3ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 1-3 Νοεμβρίου 2001 
203 
 
behaved set of points along a diagonal line. The figure below shows an example from a 
Portuguese–Greek parallel text: 
n 
With these points we can build a linear regression equation which helps to decide which are 
the good points and which are the bad points for alignment. This filtering is needed because 
it may be the case that the position of a token in a particular text in one language was 
wrongly paired with the position of the identical token in the parallel text of the other 
language. This leads to noisy points which usually lay far away from the diagonal line. The 
filtering of those noisy points is based on the confidence bands of linear regression lines and 
on the histogram of distances between the actual value of the y co-ordinate of the 
correspondence point and its expected value computed with the linear regression equation. 
That is, for each point (x,y), the aligner computes the expected ŷ and checks how far the 
actual value y is from it. If it lays outside the confidence interval, than that point is filtered 
out. An overview of the algorithm is given below is (see [8], [9], for a more detailed account): 
1. 
Take two parallel texts A and B; 
2. 
For each text, build a table with the positions of each word. The positions are 
given by the offset from the beginning of the file measured in number of bytes; 
3. 
Define the points (0,0) and (length of text A, length of text B) as the extremes of 
the initial segment where more correspondence points will be searched; 
4. 
Build a set of candidate segments using the co-ordinates of identical sequences 
of characters which occur with the same frequency within the segment; use the 
co-ordinates of previously identified translations should an extracted bilingual 
lexicon be already available; 
 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 3ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 1-3 Νοεμβρίου 2001 
204 
Since not all points defined using this rule are good points, we build a linear regression with 
all points and use histograms and confidence bands to filter the noisy points: 
5. 
Filtering out bad points.  
5.1. Build a linear regression line using the co-ordinates of the segments; 
5.2. Build a table with the distances between the expected and the real 
positions of y at each point. Use the linear regression equation to compute 
the value of the expected ŷ value given a co-ordinate x; 
5.3. Compute the confidence bands of the linear regression line and remove all 
points outside the band; 
6. 
Re-apply steps 4 to 6 (recursive algorithm) for each piece of parallel text 
between two consecutive segments in order to find more correspondence points. 
6. 
Extraction of Translations of Terms 
The key issue for the extraction of translation of terms is to find a correlation between the 
co-occurrences of terms in the aligned texts segments. In general, the more often two terms 
appear together in aligned segments, the greater the chance they are translations. 
The aligner splits the parallel texts into aligned segments. These aligned segments can be 
used to track the distribution similarity of translations. In order to measure how similar two 
terms are, i.e. to measure whether a term in a particular language is a translation of a term 
in another language, we use a similarity measure. We start by building a table which counts 
the number of co-occurrences of two specific terms in the aligned segments. This is called a 
contingency table. The contingency table for the pair ‘Επιτροπή των Ευρωπαϊκών 
Κοινοτήτων’ – ‘Comissão das Comunidades Europeias’ (‘Commission of the European 
Communities’) is shown below: 
N: 162347 
(595) ‘Επιτροπή των 
Ευρωπαϊκών Κοινοτήτων’
× ‘Επιτροπή των 
Ευρωπαϊκών Κοινοτήτων’ 
(601) ‘Comissão das Comunidades Europeias’ 
(a) 499 
(b) 102 
× ‘Comissão das Comunidades Europeias’ 
(c) 96 
(d) 161650 
N is the total number of aligned segments. The Greek term occurs in 595 aligned segments 
whereas the Portuguese term occurs in 601 segments. The table stores the number of 
aligned segments that contain (a) both terms (‘Επιτροπή των Ευρωπαϊκών Κοινοτήτων’ and 
‘Comissão das Comunidades Europeias’), (b) the Portuguese term but not the Greek term, 
(c) the Greek term but not the Portuguese term and (d) neither term. 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 3ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 1-3 Νοεμβρίου 2001 
205 
 
The difference between the number of occurrences of both terms may result from different 
translations or from some occasional misalignment. Different translations may be due to 
syntactic constraints or to alternative translations made by the human translator as shown below: 
 
Greek 
Portuguese
Αντιπροσωπεία της Επιτροπής των 
Ευρωπαϊκών Κοινοτήτων 
Delegação da Comissão das Comunidades 
Europeias 
Τα έξοδα στα οποία υποβλήθηκαν η Γαλλική 
Κυβέρνηση και η Κυβέρνηση του Ηνωμένου 
Βασιλείου καθώς και η Επιτροπή 
As despesas efectuadas pelos Governos 
francês e do Reino Unido e pela Comissão 
das Comunidades Europeias 
By using the score provided by the Average Mutual Information, it is possible to identify 
correct translations for terms across the several languages. A comprehensive analysis of 
similarity measures was carried out in [10] where, as a conclusion, this similarity measure 
proved to be appropriate for the task of identifying translation equivalents. The Average 
Mutual Information is computed as follows: 
∑∑
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
}1,
0
{
}1,
0
{
2
))
(
)
(
)
,
(
(
log
)
,
(
)
;
(
x
y
y
Y
p
x
X
p
y
Y
x
X
p
y
Y
x
X
p
Y
X
I
 
where X and Y are the two terms to be tested as translations. In this formula, p(x=1, y=0) is 
the probability that term X occurs but term Y does not. 
7. 
Results 
We used the corpus described in section 3 to test our methodology. The texts were aligned 
and terms were extracted. The table below presents some translations of terms: 
English 
Greek 
Portuguese 
JUDGMENT OF THE 
COURT 
ΑΠΟΦΑΣΗ ΤΟΥ 
ΔΙΚΑΣΤΗΡΙΟΥ 
ACÓRDÃO DO TRIBUNAL 
DE JUSTIÇA 
Advocate General 
γενικός εισαγγελέας 
advogado – geral 
On those grounds 
Για τους λόγους αυτούς 
Pelos fundamentos expostos 
Language of the case 
Γλώσσα διαδικασίας 
Língua do processo 
Furthermore 
Επιπλέον 
Além disso 
Commission of the European 
Communities 
Επιτροπή των Ευρωπαϊκών 
Κοινοτήτων 
Comissão das Comunidades 
Europeias 
Member States 
κρατών μελών 
Estados – membros 
Act of Accession 
Πράξεως Προσχωρήσεως 
Acto de adesão 
President of the Chamber 
πρόεδρο τμήματος 
presidente de secção 
First Chamber 
πρώτο τμήμα 
Primeira Secção 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 3ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 1-3 Νοεμβρίου 2001 
206 
We can see some terms quite characteristic of the domain like ‘Commission of the European 
Communities’ or ‘Advocate General’. However, in our list, we also got other terms which are 
not characteristic but which reflect general patterns of language usage like ‘Furthermore’, 
‘Επιπλέον’ and ‘Além disso’, or ‘United Kingdom’, ‘Ηνωμένο Βασίλειο’ and ‘Reino Unido’, in 
English, Greek and Portuguese, respectively. The fact is that the extractor of terms, 
described in section 4, tends to capture typical sequences of tokens. It is not wise enough to 
distinguish what terms are specific to the domain and which are of general usage. 
Furthermore, we should stress that we also got some problems due to the inflectional nature 
of the languages. ‘Member States’ had some alternative translations in Greek as ‘κρατών 
μελών’ or ‘κράτη μέλη’ depending on the case. As a result, their scores were low. 
8. 
Conclusions 
In this paper we have presented a methodology to compile a bilingual terminology databank 
for Greek–English and Greek–Portuguese by extracting translations of terms from parallel 
texts. It is a language independent methodology which does not recur to heuristics and does 
not require a priori language knowledge. Although the aligner introduced some errors with 
occasional misalignments of parallel text segments due to different word orders, it was 
possible to extract reliable translations. Furthermore, we believe that better results could be 
obtained by lemmatising the texts and/or extracting typical sequences of characters using a 
methodology similar to the one used to extract the terms. All in all, the results obtained look 
rather promising. 
9. 
Future Work 
We intend to take advantage of the conversion of the Greek character set to the Latin 
character set in order to have more correspondence points between two texts. By identifying 
similar words after the conversion, like ‘Demokratía’ (‘Δημοκρατία’) and ‘Democracia’, in 
Greek and Portuguese, or ‘Noembríou’ (‘Νοεμβρίου’) and ‘November’ in Greek and English, 
it will be possible to find more correspondence points. This will further improve our results 
and lead to more accurate translations of terms. There are also some other issues to be 
analysed more carefully like word inflection and term extraction. Although it is not as hard in 
English as in Greek or Portuguese, word inflection results in terms which have lower 
frequency in the texts and which may not be extracted. Moreover, when they are extracted, 
they may lead to several alternative translations since the correct translation depends on the 
syntactic constraints. This is clearly a problem that must be analysed and which we wish to 
look into more detail in the near future. 
 
 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 3ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 1-3 Νοεμβρίου 2001 
207 
 
10. Bibliography 
[1] Brown, P., Lai, J. and Mercer, R., Aligning Sentences in Parallel Corpora, 1991, in 
Proceedings of the 29th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, Berkeley, California, U.S.A., 169–176. 
[2] ELRA (European Language Resources Association), Multilingual Corpora for Co-
operation, 1997, Disk 2 of 2, Paris, France. 
[3] Fung, P. and McKeown, K., Aligning Noisy Parallel Corpora across Language Groups: 
Word Pair Feature Matching by Dynamic Time Warping, 1994, in Technology 
Partnerships for Crossing the Language Barrier: Proceedings of the First Conference of 
the Association for Machine Translation in the Americas, Columbia, Maryland, U.S.A., 
81–88. 
[4] Gale, W. and Church, K., Identifying Word Correspondences in Parallel Texts, 1991, in 
Proceedings of the 4th DARPA Speech and Natural Language Workshop, Pacific 
Grove, California, U.S.A., Morgan Kaufmann, 152–157. 
[5] Kay, M. and Röscheisen, M., Text-Translation Alignment, 1993, in Computational 
Linguistics, volume 19, number 1, 121–142. 
[6] Piperidis, S., Papageorgiou, H. and Boutsis, S., From Sentences to Words and 
Clauses, 2000, in Véronis, J. (ed.), Parallel Text Processing, Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 117–138. 
[7] Melamed, I., Bitext Maps and Alignment via Pattern Recognition, 1999, in 
Computational Linguistics, volume 25, number 1, 107–130. 
[8] Ribeiro A., Lopes G. and Mexia J., Using Confidence Bands for Parallel Texts 
Alignment, 2000, in Proceedings of the 38th Conference of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics (ACL 2000), Hong Kong, China, 432–439. 
[9] Ribeiro, A., Lopes, G. and Mexia, J., A Self-Learning Method of Parallel Texts 
Alignment, 2000, in White, J. (ed.), Envisioning Machine Translation in the Information 
Future – Proceedings of the 4th Conference of the Association for Machine Translation 
in the Americas, AMTA 2000 – Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, Cuernavaca, 
Mexico, volume 1934, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany, 30–39. 
[10] Ribeiro, A., Lopes, G. and Mexia, J., Extracting Equivalents from Aligned Parallel Texts 
– Comparison of Measures of Similarity, 2000, in Monard, M. and Sichman, J. (eds.), 
Advances in Artificial Intelligence – Proceedings of the International Joint Conference 
IBERAMIA 2000 / SBIA 2000 – 7th Ibero-American Conference on Artificial Intelligence 
(IBERAMIA 2000) and the 15th Conference of the Brazilian Society of Artificial 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 3ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 1-3 Νοεμβρίου 2001 
208 
Intelligence (SBIA 2000) – Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, São Paulo, Brazil, 
volume 1952, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany, 340–349. 
[11] da Silva, J., Dias, G., Guilloré, S. and Lopes, J., Using Localmaxs Algorithms for the 
Extraction of Contiguous and Non-contiguous Multiword Lexical Units, 1999, in 
Barahona, P. and Alferes, J. (eds.), Progress in Artificial Intelligence – Lecture Notes in 
Artificial Intelligence, volume 1695, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany, 113–132. 
[12] Simard, M. and Plamondon, P., Bilingual Sentence Alignment: Balancing Robustness 
and Accuracy, 1998, in Machine Translation, volume 13, number 1, 59–80. 
 
António Ribeiro 
PhD Student 
Universidade Nova de Lisboa 
Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia 
Departamento de Informática 
Quinta da Torre, P-2829-516 Caparica 
Portugal 
ambar@di.fct.unl.pt 
 
 
 
Gabriel Lopes 
Principal Researcher 
Universidade Nova de Lisboa 
Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia 
Departamento de Informática 
Quinta da Torre, P-2829-516 Caparica 
Portugal 
gpl@di.fct.unl.pt
 
João Mexia
Full Professor 
Universidade Nova de Lisboa 
Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia 
Departamento de Matemática 
Quinta da Torre, P-2829-516 Caparica 
Portugal 
 
 
 
 
 
