SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/4th%20Conference/4th_05-20-SotiropoulosMegaklis.pdf

ΕΛΕΤΟ – 4ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 30, 31 Οκτωβρίου και 1 Νοεμβρίου 2003 
 
 
1
CONCEPTS’ INTERRELATIONS 
 
Meg. Th. Sotiropoulos 
 
SUMMARY 
Concepts are couples of sets O and A. (O, A) gives the concept, that is the assignment, of the object 0 
(a set of one or more elements -there is no real difference) to the set A of (common) attributes. The 
objects do not really exist: they just change according to the sequence of attributes. The objects are not 
definite, not standard. So, manipulations on objects are useless and meaningless. Besides, we realize, 
that a concept is not only an assignment from 0 to A but also an assignment from A to 0, that is 
dynamic. Exactly as multimedia are. The connections and links we need in multimedia are expressed, 
naturally, by concepts, since concepts are proved to have the structure of a lattice. So, we have a more 
complex order than linear and hierarchical ones. The lattice can be created by two algebraic operations. 
The operations we introduce, create a more rich lattice with more possibilities, combinations, varieties 
(different operations may create different lattices). So, our lattice serves as the deep knowledge for 
decision making, virtual reality and multimedia. 
 
ΔΙΑΠΛΕΚΟΜΕΝΕΣ ΕΝΝΟΙΕΣ 
Μεγ. Θ. Σωτηρόπουλος 
 
ΠΕΡΙΛΗΨΗ 
Έννοια ορίζουμε το ζεύγος των αντικειμένων αφενός και αφετέρου των κοινών τους ιδιοτήτων. Τα 
αντικείμενα αλλάζουν ανάλογα με τις ιδιότητες που εξετάζουμε. Άρα εκείνο που έχει σημασία είναι η 
σύνδεση μεταξύ των αντικειμένων και των ιδιοτήτων. Π.χ., όταν ο άνθρωπος δείχνει με το δάχτυλό του 
κάτι τότε δημιουργείται μία έννοια (δάχτυλο, δεικνυόμενο), ενώ τα ζώα δεν αντιλαμβάνονται αυτή τη 
σύνδεση.  
Ανάμεσα στις έννοιες ορίζουμε πράξεις ένωσης, τομής, διαφοράς και συμπληρωματικής έννοιας. 
Παρατηρούμε τότε ότι από δύο έννοιες προκύπτουν άλλες τρεις, μία υπερκείμενη, μία υποκείμενη και 
μία ανέντακτη (μη διατεταγμένη). Άρα, η δομή των εννοιών που έχουμε δεν είναι ούτε απλά γραμμική 
ούτε δενδρική (ιεραρχική). Αποδεικνύεται ότι είναι η μαθηματική δομή του Συνδέσμου. 
Συνεπώς, η ίδια η φύση, η ζωή και η γλώσσα μας οδηγούν σε διαπλεκόμενες έννοιες και όχι a priori 
ιεραρχίες. Θα δοθούν πολλά παραδείγματα από τη Γεωμετρία, τη Φυσική, τη Βιολογία, τη Γλωσσολογία, 
την Ιατρική κλπ. 
 
 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 4ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 30, 31 Οκτωβρίου και 1 Νοεμβρίου 2003 
 
 
2
1  Mathematical structure of concepts 
Definition 1. Concept is every assignment of a prototype to an icon, whatever may be the 
prototype and the icon. We call the prototype “object” and the icon “attributes”. We 
symbolize a concept with a couple whose left part is the object and right part the attributes. 
Definition 2. (O1, A1) 
•
∪ (O2, A2) = (O1 ∪ O2, A1 ∩A2), where ∪and ∩ are the usual 
operations between sets, union and intersection, respectively. 
Definition 3. (O1, A1) 
•∩ (O2, A2) = (O1 ∩ O2, A1 ∪A2), 
With the above two operations, for every two concepts, there exist a “higher” and a “lower” 
concept. 
Definition 4. (O1, A1) 
•
⊆ (O2, A2) ⇔(O1 ⊆ O2 and A1 ⊇ A2), where ⊆ and ⊇ denote 
the usual subset and superset, respectively. The subordinated concept (O1, A1) are the 
species and the superordinated concept (O2, A2) is the genus. 
Definition 5. The complement of the concept (O, A) is the concept (OC, AC), where OC and 
AC are the usual set-theoretic complements of O and A, respectively. 
Definition 6. The symmetric-difference of two concepts (O1, A1) and (O2, A2), is the concept 
D= (O1 
•+  O2, (A1 
•+  A2)C), where O1 
•+  O2 and A1 
•+  A2 are the usual set-theoretic 
symmetric-differences of O1 and O2 or A1 and A2, respectively. 
The set C of all concepts, with the two operations intersection (
•∩) and symmetric-
difference D is proved to have the order of a lattice. 
The symmetric-difference shows us the dissimilarities of the system of concepts and the 
intersection the similarities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 4ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 30, 31 Οκτωβρίου και 1 Νοεμβρίου 2003 
 
 
3
 
Where D is the symmetric-difference of (O1, A1) and (O2, A2). The arrows give the 
subordinated concepts. (O1, A1), (O2, A2) and D are located on the same level and, 
consequently, there is no order among them. 
Definition 7. We call distance d(X,Y) of two sets X and Y, the non-negative integer 
expressing the number of elements of the set X 
•+  Y, that is of their symmetric-difference (in 
symbols n(X 
•+  Y)). So, d(X,Y) = n(X 
•+  Y). 
The three known properties of a distance hold: 
1. 
d(X,Y)= n(X 
•+  Y) ≥ 0 and d(X,X) = n(X 
•+  X)= n (Φ)=0 
2. 
d(X,Y)= n(X 
•+  Y) = n (X 
•+  Y) = d(Y,X), since X 
•+  Y = Y 
•+  X 
3. 
d(X,Y) + d(Y,Z) = n(X 
•+  Y) + n (Y
•+ Z). 
We observe that (X
•+ Y) 
•+  (Y
•+ Z) = X
•+ Z. Generally, A
•+ B=(A∪B) - (A ∩B), but 
n(A
•+ B)   = [n(A) + n(B) - n(A∩B)] - n(A∩B) = n(A) + n(B) -2n(A∩B). 
So, n(X 
•+  Z) = n(X 
•+  Y)+ n(Y 
•+  Z) - 2n [(X 
•+  Y) ∩(Y
•+ Z)] ⇒ n(X
•+ Y) + n(Y 
•+  Z) 
≥n(X
•+ Z). Consequently, the third property is valid. 
Let's go, now, to the concepts. We can take d(O1 O2)=n (O1
•+ O2), which is a distance 
between objects, but it does not say many things, since it is quantitative but not qualitative: 
two sets of objects may have many different elements, coming from the same homogenous 
population (Statistics ....). Besides, we are not working with objects or attributes, but with 
both of them, that is concepts. The symmetric-difference O1
•+ Ο2 of the objects, has the icon 
(A1
•+ A2)c. So, if we want the real distance of O1 and O2, we must check (A1
•+ A2)c. 
d(A1,A2)=n(A1
•+ A2)=n(Ω') - n((A1
•+ A2)c), where Ω' is the set of all attributes (in our certain 
application). So, n((A1
•+ A2)°)=n(Ω') - d(A1,A2). n(Ω') is a constant. Consequently, if the 
distance of the attributes is increasing, n((A1
•+ A2)c) is decreasing and the distance of the 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 4ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 30, 31 Οκτωβρίου και 1 Νοεμβρίου 2003 
 
 
4
objects is, accordingly, decreasing. The explanation comes naturally: if we have a large 
range of attributes, this range can fit only to a small range of objects. 
2  General Theory of Terminology 
The proposed algebraic structure is in complete accordance with the General Theory of 
Terminology. It gives, also, acceptable results from the view of cognition and learning. 
All the situations, “real” or “imaginary” can be expressed. Let's take an isolated object O1. As 
soon as we discover an isolated attribute a1 we have the concept (O1, a1). With a second 
isolated attribute a2 we have: 
(O1, a1) 
•
∪ (O1, a2) = (O1 ∪O1, a1 ∩a2) = (O1, a1 ∩ a2) = (O1,∅) 
(because we suppose that a1 and a2 are different attributes) and 
(O1, a1) 
•∩ (O1, a2) = (O1 ∩O1, a1 ∪a2) = (O1, a1 ∪ a2). 
So, we have created a new concept: (O1, a1 ∪ a2). This means that the isolated object O1 
has both attributes a1 and a2. 
With a third isolated attribute a3 we take three new concepts, (O1, a1 ∪ a3), (O1, a2  ∪ a3) 
and (O1, a1 ∪ a2 ∪ a3). We proceed, till we create the concept (O1, A1), where A1 is the 
set of all the attributes of O1. 
So, for every object, we go to deeper levels of order as we discover more attributes of it. The 
meaning is that for every new attribute, the object is classified to an always thinner 
classification. It may seem strange that, though we add attributes, we go to subordinate 
concepts but, really this is an advantage and very logical: the more attributes we add, the 
more we specify the object, the closer we go to it. 
On the other hand, there are concepts with no order among them. For example (O1, a1) and 
(O1, a2) are located in the same level: neither superordinated nor subordinated the one to 
the other, but, also, not equal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 4ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 30, 31 Οκτωβρίου και 1 Νοεμβρίου 2003 
 
 
5
 
Figure 3. 
 
Figure 4. 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 4ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 30, 31 Οκτωβρίου και 1 Νοεμβρίου 2003 
 
 
6
Figure 4, if seen from bottom to top, gives the “natural” impression that the final concept (O1, 
a1 ∪a2 ∪a3) is built, step by step, from the empty set. 
Suppose we have the concepts (O1, A1), (O2, A2) and (O3, A3), where O1, O2, O3 are isolated 
objects and A1, A2, A3 their sets of attributes, respectively. This means that every one of 
them stands at the top of a figure like Figure 4. We begin to take unions (∪) and 
intersections (
•∩) between them and after-wards between them and the first results and so 
on. 
From the unions we find: (O1 ∪O2, A1 ∩A2), (O1 ∪O3, A1 ∩A3), (O2 ∪O3, A2 ∩A3) 
and (O1 ∪O2 ∪O3, A1 ∩A2 ∩A3). 
The intersections give us always the empty set in the left part of every couple because the 
isolated objects are supposed to be distinct. In this way, (∅, A) means that the empty set 
has all the attributes of the set A. There is no problem to accept such a thing because, to the 
empty set, we may assign every attribute. Moreover, a concept like (∅, A) can be useful in 
the structure because, e.g., (∅, A) 
•
∪ (B, C) = (∅∪B, A∩C) = (B, A ∩ C), which is a 
new result. The attributes A may correspond to an object not yet discovered (like the case of 
some planets, comets and atomic particles) or to an object that should be created or named 
(terminography work), so that we make an extension of our system. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. 
 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 4ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 30, 31 Οκτωβρίου και 1 Νοεμβρίου 2003 
 
 
7
The cycle in Figure 5 represents the Figure 4. 
 
Figure 4 gives us another possibility: all the concepts involving the same object O1, form 
another sublattice (class). So, we have all the possible scenarios concerning this object. 
Figure 5 shows us the same result with Figure 3, but with a whole set A1 of attributes, in 
stead of the isolated attribute a1. This means that we can impose a whole set of conditions. 
The access to information in not linear, but follows the structure of the lattice. Of course, real 
applications may give a sublattice of A, or, if we are unlucky, no order among the concepts. 
In every case, if we, afterwards, create all the pζossible combinations (by using •∩
, 
•
∪ and 
the symmetric-differences), we find a complete lattice. 
Links are a main characteristic of lattices. Conceptual lattices are created naturally from the 
attributes of their objects. For example, in Figure 3, from the top to the bottom there are two 
paths concerning the object O1 and the attribute a1. The smallest sublattice is the 
“elementary rhomb” of Figure 1. 
 
3  Examples 
a) from Geometry: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The structure is not a tree: a rectangle with equal sides becomes a square, but, also, a 
rhomb, with equal angles becomes a square. A square can be considered as a descendant 
of the rectangle, but also, of the rhomb. 
The four concepts (parallelogram, rectangle, rhomb, square) form a lattice: {rectangle} 
parallelogram
rhomb
squere
rectangle
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 4ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 30, 31 Οκτωβρίου και 1 Νοεμβρίου 2003 
 
 
8
•
∪{rhomb} = {parallelogram} and {rectangle}  
•∩{rhomb} = {square}. 
 
b) from vehicles: 
i) a submarine can move on the surface of the sea, but, also, under the surface (or rest on 
the bottom of the sea!). Is it a ship…? 
ii) “Columbia” space vehicle, when coming back to the Earth, moves as a usual airplane… 
iii) what about “Flying Dolphins”, “Hovercrafts” and so on? They move on the surface of the 
sea (ships), but their movement obeys, partly, the laws of Physics obeyed by the airplanes! 
So: 
a ship has sails or/and propeller, moves only on the sea surface 
a submarine has propeller, moves on the sea surface and under the surface 
a Flying Dolphin has propeller, moves on the sea surface and slides with wings on it 
wind-surfer has sail, slides on the sea surface. 
It is obvious that the relations among these concepts do not form an hierarchy (a tree) E.g., 
one could say that a submarine is a special ship (that is, a ship capable of moving 
underwater), but the truth is that a submarine is something different than a ship (despite the 
fact that it can more, also, on the sea surface – as the ships do). Besides, there are ships 
moving with sails or with propeller and sails together (while the submarines use only 
propeller). Conclusion: objects and attributes are both necessary for a concept to be formed. 
c)  from Medicine: 
i) “reading” an X-ray picture is a very difficult task. E.g., how can one discriminate 
pneumonia from cancer of lungs? To a certain extent, the two pictures are alike. 
ii) fever and cough may lead to several different diseases… 
iii) some substances can serve as a poison or a medicine (like women)! That’s why, in 
Greece, we say “pharmako” = medicine and “pharmaki” = poison. 
d) from every day life: 
i) In German language, women use the expression “meine Man”. But, it not clear what they 
mean by the term “Man”: their husband, their boy-friend or something else…? 
ii) Several newspapers (especially in Greece) use in their title the term “free”… 
iii) Several political parties (all over the world) use in their title the term “democratic”… In the 
USA, the two major political parties are the “Democrats” and the “Republicans” (which 
means, also, democrats…) 
iv) Almost all regimes claim that they have free elections… 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 4ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 30, 31 Οκτωβρίου και 1 Νοεμβρίου 2003 
 
 
9
v) A famous Greek painter has expressed the following opinion: “you are what you declare 
to be”! This is a great truth! According to the set of attributes you present each time, you 
belong to the corresponding class (=concept) of people… 
vi) Virtual Reality is based, exactly, on the set of attributes we present each time. Women 
know something more about that, using make-up e.t.c. 
vii) A recent research in Europe has revealed a strange fact: Tse Guevara is a symbol not 
only for many parties of the left political wing, but, also, for several parties of the right 
wing!!… It seems that a subset of attributes of the personality of Tse belongs to the path or 
semi-lattice or lattice or, generally, the network of the left way or thinking, while another 
subset belongs to the right way of thinking. Maybe, Tse does not belong neither to the one 
nor to the other wing (frame)… 
viii) “It is so, if you consider it so” (Luigi Pirantello) 
ix) Double-agents are a good example of belonging, partly, to two different (?) systems 
(“masters”). 
x) A few years ago, something terrible was discovered: the main lawyer supporting one 
political party, was, also, the main lawyer of the opponent political party!!! (…?) 
 
4  Remarks 
All lattices are not equivalent. Some of them are “richer” than the others. “Rich” means that 
they are consisted of more concepts, more possible situations. 
Professor R. Wille takes as concepts only the standardized ones. Obviously, this fits well 
with robots, but not with human beings. Freedom and fantasy can give birth to many partly 
different or absolutely new objects-we do not have the right to exclude them. Our proposed 
system of concepts is not closed but open. Open to new concepts, open to probability, open 
to fuzziness, open to not predefined situations. 
Our classification is not imposed from above (…), but it comes naturally from the attributes 
of the objects themselves. We have defined operations between concepts: union and 
intersection to express similarities (common objects or common attributes) and symmetric – 
differences between objects. So, we can make our classifications as thin as we want. Prof. 
Wille does not provide operations and, moreover, he does not treat differences. Obviously, 
another mentality … But, real life is full of differences and we are not allowed to normalize 
human thought!  
We use couples in order to define concepts, because, in this way, we express the relativity 
of the objects. People are taught to think with trees – this is the simple and not annoying 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 4ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 30, 31 Οκτωβρίου και 1 Νοεμβρίου 2003 
 
 
10
way…But, real life is full of complexities and lattice is one of the instruments to express 
them. In a tree, the child comes from only one parent (…), while in the lattice every child has 
two parents. Indeed, the child is the link between the two parents. Hierarchies are not the 
unique kind of order (…).  
General conclusion: two concepts can be interrelated either by having common objects or by 
having common attributes. 
 
5  Bibliography  
ALTY and COMBS (1984): “Expert Systems”, NCC Publitions. 
BIRKHOFF, G. (1967): «Lattice Theory», third edition, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence. R.I., 
U.S.A. 
FELBER H. (1984): “Terminology Manual”, UNESCO, Paris. 
KECHAJOPOULOU N. (1985): “Introduction to the Theory of Lattices”, Athens. 
SOTIROPOULOS M.T. (1989): «From Terminology to Informatics via Conceptual – 
Mathematical Models», «Terminologie et Traduction», No 3, 35-141. 
SOTIROPOULOS M.T., «A conceptual-mathematical model for Data Bases and Expert – 
Systems», Doctor’s Dissertation submitted to the School of Natural and Technical 
Sciences, Johannes Kepler University, Linz, Austria. 
SOTIROPOULOS M.T. (1995): «A Mathematical Model of Concepts for Knowledge 
Extraction from Statistical Data», Proceedings of the Second International 
Conference of New Techniques and Technologies for Statistics (NTTS – 95), Bonn, 
Germany, 20 – 22 November, 465 – 471. 
SOTIROPOULOS M.T. (1992): Mathematical Theory of Concepts: a mew tool for the 
application of Logo to Education», Poster Proceedings of the 12th World Computer 
Congress of the IFIP, Madrid, Spain, September 7 –11, 84. 
TWAY, Linda E, (1992): «Work with Multimedia», Management Information Source, Inc., 
New York. 
WILLE, r. (1988): «Restructuring Lattice Theory», Rival I., (ed): «Ordered Sets», Reidel 
Publ. Co.  
 
 
Megaklis Th. Sotiropoulos, M. Sc., Greek Ministry of Education, Imittou 148, 116 35 Athens, 
Greece, tel.: ++/210-6144050. fax.: ++/210-3218458, e-mail: melcopyc@otenet.gr 
