SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/ELETO-EAFT_Conference_2013-11-07/ELETO-EAFT-Symposium-2013_AnnaAnastasiadis-Symeonidis_CV_EN.pdf

EAFT–ELETO Symposium 
“National Languages and Terminology  
in Higher Education, Science & Technology” 
Athens, Greece, 7 November 2013 
 
 
Anna Anastassiadis-Symeonidis 
ansym@lit.auth.gr 
 
Prof. Anastassiadis-Symeonidis is an emeritus professor of Linguistics at the 
Department of Philology (Section: Linguistics) of the Aristotle University of 
Thessaloniki. In 1974 she obtained her M.A. from the Paris III University. In 1985 she 
obtained her PhD from the University of Athens. She has taken part in Postgraduate 
studies at various French Universities in Theoretical and Applied Linguistics, such as 
Lexicology, Lexicography, Computational Linguistics and Morphology. From 1991 to 
2012 she was the coordinator of ERASMUS projects with 7 other European 
universities. She has taught as visiting professor at many European universities such 
as Sorbonne-Paris IV, INALCO in Paris, the Paris XIII University and the University of 
Cyprus.  
Prof. Anastassiadis-Symeonidis is interested in the study of the Greek Lexicon and 
vocabulary, in compilation of printed and electronic dictionaries, in neology, 
borrowing, word formation (derivation and compounding), multiword units, 
terminology, spelling and vocabulary teaching. Particularly, she has drawn the form 
and structure of the Dictionary of Modern Greek (1998, Institute of Modern Greek 
Studies of Aristotle University of Thessaloniki – Manolis Triantafyllides Foundation, 
www.komvos.edu.gr ) where she was the editor in chief from 1976-1980. 
She is the author of 5 books, of the Reverse Dictionary of Modern Greek (2002, 
Institute of Modern Greek Studies of Aristotle University of Thessaloniki – Manolis 
Triantafyllides Foundation, www.komvos.edu.gr). She created the macrostructure of 
the Greek-English Dictionary (100,000 entries, project Koraïs – 2008, University of 
Patras/Greece).  She is the author of 2 translations on Introduction to Linguistics: G. 
Mounin, Clefs pour la linguistique, Athens 1984, 1988, Bank of Greece and J. Lyons, 
Introduction to Theoretical Linguistics, (in collaboration), Athens 2002, Metaihmio. 
She has also authored over 150 papers that have been published in various journals 
and conferences worldwide.   
 
