SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/6th%20Conference/6th_27-01-KvamSigmund%20paper_V03.pdf

ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
 
1
27   Terminology and translation theory:  
A functional-pragmatic approach 
    
Sigmund Kvam 
ABSTRACT 
In this paper the concept terms covers both the systematic designation of defined concepts within a 
specific field as well as ‘field specific lexemes in a broader sense’. 
The object of functional pragmatic translation is text as a communicative unit, representing a specific 
genre, which again is defined as conventionalized patterns of communication. In this context translation 
is seen as an interlingual, target group oriented reproduction of a text in a given genre. 
Within a functional-pragmatic framework terms cannot be translated in communicative isolation, but as 
structural configurations of onomastic fields to fulfil a specific set of functions in the target text discourse 
community. This will be demonstrated by means of examples from translations between German, 
English, Norwegian and Greek.  
In accordance with the theoretical statements and as shown in the examples, the translation of 
terminological elements in texts is carried out as ‘lexeme-in-function’: Both the specific translation 
situation (the intended effect(s) of the target text in a specific situation) and the specific socio-lingual 
context (semantic, structural and cultural factors) of the translation constrain the lexicalisation and 
grammaticalisation of specific onomastic fields. 
 
Ορολογία και θεωρία της μετάφρασης: Μια λειτουργική-
πραγματολογική προσέγγιση 
 
Sigmund Kvam 
ΠΕΡΙΛΗΨΗ 
Στην παρούσα ανακοίνωση η έννοια όροι καλύπτει τη συστηματική κατασήμανση εννοιών που ορίζονται 
σε ένα συγκεκριμένο πεδίο καθώς και ‘προσιδιάζοντα σε ένα πεδίο λεξήματα υπό την ευρύτερη έννοια’. 
Αντικείμενο της λειτουργικής πραγματολογικής μετάφρασης είναι το κείμενο ως επικοινωνιακή μονάδα, 
που αντιπροσωπεύει ένα συγκεκριμένο κειμενικό είδος, το οποίο, με τη σειρά του, ορίζεται ως 
συμβατικός τύπος επικοινωνίας. Στο πλαίσιο αυτό, η μετάφραση αντιμετωπίζεται ως διαγλωσσική, 
προσανατολισμένη στην ομάδα-στόχο αναπαραγωγή ενός κειμένου σε ένα συγκεκριμένο κειμενικό 
είδος. 
Σε ένα λειτουργικό-πραγματολογικό πλαίσιο, οι όροι δεν μπορούν να μεταφραστούν απομονωμένοι από 
την επικοινωνιακή τους λειτουργία αλλά ως δομικά μορφώματα ονομαστικών πεδίων προς εκπλήρωση 
ενός συγκεκριμένου συνόλου λειτουργιών στην κοινότητα-δέκτη του κειμένου-στόχου. Αυτό θα 
αποδειχθεί με παραδείγματα από μεταφράσεις μεταξύ Γερμανικών, Αγγλικών, Νορβηγικών και 
Ελληνικών. 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
 
2
Σύμφωνα με τη θεωρητική προσέγγιση και όπως φαίνεται στα παραδείγματα, η μετάφραση ορολογικών 
στοιχείων σε κείμενα διεξάγεται ως ‘λέξημα εν λειτουργία’. Τόσο η συγκεκριμένη μεταφραστική 
κατάσταση (το(τα) επιδιωκόμενο(α) αποτέλεσμα(τα) του κειμένου-στόχου σε συγκεκριμένη κατάσταση) 
όσο και το συγκεκριμένο κοινωνιογλωσσικό συγκείμενο (σημασιολογικοί, δομικοί και πολιτισμικοί 
παράγοντες) της μετάφρασης θέτουν περιορισμούς στη λεξικοποίηση και γραμματικοποίηση των 
συγκεκριμένων ονομαστικών πεδίων. 
 
 
 
 
1   Definitions  
1.1   Topic of analysis 
The topic of the following analysis is terminology within the framework of functional 
pragmatics in translation theory. To discuss this, definitions of the central concepts 
terminology,  functional pragmatics, and translation are needed. 
Terminology is regarded as the systematic designation of defined concepts within a specific 
field, requiring specialized knowledge and the authorization to exercise a specific profession 
connected to this specialized knowledge. Terminology is thus not only defined 
onomastically, but also socially: it is also connected to language use in specific professional 
situations by people with specific qualifications for exercising a given profession. 
This is indeed a pragmatic approach to terminology, being derived from a pragmatic 
definition of Fachsprache or special language as this is frequently labelled in English: Verbal 
and non-verbal official professional communication, carried out by specialists for the purpose 
of representing the social interests of an organisation ([8], 31; [5], 51ff.). 
The basic aspect of functional pragmatics  is closely related to the concept of meaning. In 
this paper meaning is a social, anthropologic category, not a fixed system of taxonomically 
organized semantic features as traditionally known in structural semantics. An example of 
the latter is the mathematical model of communication presented by [10]  where meaning is 
seen as a fixed system of static entities outside communication  from which certain elements 
were to be selected and shuffled though a channel of communication, passing filters of noise 
and reaching the receiver with the same exact amount of information as they were sent by 
the sender through the channel. A pragmatic approach, however, regards meaning as a 
dynamic category that is being constituted  - and reconstituted – in a given socio-cultural 
context: “Meaning is not embedded in the form of an expression alone, and does not 
become transparent by the most elegant analysis of that form: it can only be interpreted 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
 
3
when it is located in a social organization and a praxis of communication” (Fredrik Barth, 
cited  in: [7], 18). Functional pragmatics is based on this anthropologic definition of meaning. 
Meaning is thus a social category; it does not exist irrespective of and ‘outside’ a 
communicative situation, but is constituted in such a situation. A given communicative 
situation in a given culture is therefore a necessary precondition for the constitution – and 
also reconstitution - of meaning.  Since meaning depends on situation and culture, it is also 
conventionalised. A situation is interpreted on the basis of tradition, conventions, i.e.: cultural 
constraints. In linguistics, this can be seen how communication is organised. Communication 
is patterned, it is realized by means of structured units called texts, and every text is 
interpreted by a given discourse community as token of a specific genre. Genre is defined 
according to the German tradition of Textsorten (e.g. [2], 129ff.) as historically developed, 
i.e. conventionalized patterns of communication serving as a point of orientation for social 
action within a given discourse community. 
In this context translation very briefly can be seen as an interlingual, target group oriented 
reconstitution of meaning in the form of a written text in a given genre in a different socio-
linguistic setting. The translation of terminology is thus more than just ‘translating the words’: 
In a translation situation the meaning of any textual element, including special lexis,  is re-
interpreted as parts of a given text in a given situation in a given language in an given 
culture and even ‘textual details’ like terminology can only be adequately analysed within this 
broad anthropologic approach. This does not mean that any analysis has to be carried out 
only at this broad, cultural level. Research on textual details is both interesting and 
necessary and therefore requires descriptive categories for such details, like traditional 
grammatical categories or a consistent model of syntactic analysis. But it would be 
erroneous to regard e.g. terminology as a purely lexical phenomenon:  as a unit of analysis it 
is lexical, but as such it is embedded in the functional framework of the text as a whole and 
can only be properly analysed with this framework, cf. [9]. 
1.2   Goal of analysis 
In the following I will first show how terms, most of them related to the onomastic field 
diabetes mellitus are translated differently depending on the specific needs of the translation 
situation, second, on the basis of these findings, I would like to set up a hypothesis in the 
form of a model or a scale for interpreting the translation of terminology within this functional-
pragmatic framework.  
 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
 
4
2   Terminology in functional-pragmatic translation  
2.1   Working hypothesis 
As pointed out in chapter 1, no textual element can be translated in communicative isolation. 
As for terms as specific lexical textual elements, they are structural configurations of more or 
less pre-defined onomastic fields to fulfil a specific set of functions in the target text 
discourse community.  This can be further explained by means of the following hypothesis: 
A. If an onomastic field X of a subject field F is communicated by a specialist S in F  in 
a situation C where S is acting officially in his or her role as SF, then the specific 
situational context CFS decides how X is contextualised and linguistically realised. 
Such linguistic realisations will be called professional field specific denotations 
(PFSD). 
B. PFSDs range from internationally normed lexemes (terminology)  via more or less 
internationally conventionalised lexemes(semi-terminology)  in field specialist 
internal knowledge management to language specific denotations in external 
knowledge management discourse by field specialists for different target groups of 
non-specialists. 
C. In this paper, translation has been defined as an interlingual reconstitution of 
meaning in a different  
socio-cultural setting. The management of these professional onomastic fields thus 
depends on the specific situation of the target discourse community, not only target 
language genre conventions, but also on the field knowledge of the target group 
and the purpose of the target text: This new contextualisation of professional 
onomastic fields calls for different linguistic choices all along the PFSD scale. In the 
following I will present some examples of the use of PFSD in different translation 
situations, thereby trying to shed some more light on the above mentioned 
hypothesis. 
2.2   Examples 
2.2.1   Change of target groups in professional medical communication 
A text on eye diseases in connection with diabetes written by an American eye specialist for 
non-specialist doctors ([6]) was translated into Norwegian as an information leaflet for 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
 
5
nurses working at municipal health stations in Norway1. The knowledge level of the two 
target groups differed, but both target groups have professional knowledge on the field of 
diabetes. The American source text made use of a wide range of Greek-Latin medical 
terminology. Some of these were translated as Greek-Latin terminology (group A):  
 
Endocrine – endokrin 
Insulin resistance – insulinresistens 
Hyperglycemia – hyperglykemi 
Glycogenic amino acids – glykogene aminosyrer 
Stenosis of the internal carotid artery – stenose  i arteria carotis interna. 
Other medical terms were translated into a non-terminological PFSD, preceded or followed 
by the corresponding Greek-Latin term (group B):  
Chronic conjunctival injection – kronisk røde øyne (konjunktival injeksjon) 
Pancreas – bukspyttkjertelen (pancreas) 
Retina – netthinnen (retina) 
Glycosuria - Glykosuri (glucose i urinen) 
Most of the terms in the source text were translated into non-terminological Norwegian 
PFSD (group C): 
Tissue hypoxia - Oksygenmangel  i vevet 
premature cataractogenesis – tidlig utvikling av grå stær 
Myopia -  nærsynthet 
Ophtalmic – når det gjelder øynene 
And some of the terms in the source text were first introduced by means of a non-
terminological PFSD, later on in the target text as Greek-Latin medical terminology, i.e. as 
text determined presuppositions (group D): 
Retinopathy – skadelige forandringer I netthinnen – retinopati 
Cataract – grå stær (katarakt) --- katarakt 
Fluctuations in refraction – fluktasjoner i brytningen (refraksjon) --- refraktive endringer 
                                                 
1  
Exam papers in LSP translation (Trans 2120) at the University of Oslo in April 2007. 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
 
6
Due to the fact that the source text sender and the target group community on the one side 
have shared knowledge with respect to diabetes, on the other side the commissioner of the 
translation prescribes the target text to be produced for a target group (nurses) with less field 
specific knowledge than the target group of the source text (doctors), a wide range of the 
PFSD scale is applied as a translation strategy:  Group A represents the common field 
specific knowledge of both target groups –  terminology is used without any further 
explanation. This is a clear sign of professional communication between different 
professional groups with differing knowledge within one onomastic field. In this case the use 
of terminology indicates the shared knowledge of the two groups. In group B a common field 
knowledge is presupposed, but not a common lexical knowledge. The semasiology of the 
case is explained, not the onomasiology. In group C the translator has left the terminology all 
together, using  the Norwegian lexemes, but presupposing the onomasiology. Group D 
corresponds in a way to group B: first, the terminological PFSD is ‘redenoted’ in Norwegian, 
and then the Greek-Latin term is used in the thematic progression of these onomastic fields 
in the text. In group B – D the translation of terminology in the source text by semi-
terminology and non-terminological PFSD clearly indicates the gap of knowledge not only 
between the sender of the source text (eye specialists) and the intended target group of the 
source text (doctors), but also between the target group of the source text (doctors) and that 
of the target text (nurses). 
2.2.2   Changes in culture between target groups  
In the case of the translation of an information leaflet for parents on diabetes by small 
children  from German to Greek2 the German expressions Zucker, ins Bett machen  were 
represented as Glukose, Sychnuria in the Greek  target text. In the Norwegian translation of 
the same source text these onomastic fields were realised as sukker (‘sugar’) and hyppig 
vannlating (‘frequent water release’). In this case all three languages realised the same 
onomastic field for corresponding target groups, all three using lexemes of external 
knowledge management, and the Greek text just being apparently terminological due to the 
etymology of these lexemes and since these lexemes also function as non-PSFD, i.e. these 
lexemes are also used by non-professionals in non-professional discourse on the given 
topic. 
                                                 
2  
This German text was made at the Erasmus Wisstrans seminar in Corfu in March 2006 and was 
translated into Greek, Danish, Norwegian and Latvian. 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
 
7
In all these examples professionally defined onomastic fields are filled with what could be 
called ‘purpose oriented lexemes’ in order to obtain a specific effect by a specific target 
group. In all these cases the function, defined as the intended effect by the intended target 
group, has been predominantly informative. Due to different  levels of  field specific 
knowledge within these target groups different types of PFSD have been used. But not all 
professional communication is informative – the use of PFSD may serve appellative 
purposes and then the PFSD scale is used completely differently. 
 
2.2.3   Function as the key of analysis 
Carbamid is used in a variety of creams and lotions for the skin and even for bleaching of 
the teeth. Carbamid is commonly known as urinstoff in Norwegian and Harnstoff in German. 
But the terminological carbamid is used in the description of the product (karbamidsalve 
(Karbamidsalbe) to avoid connotations with the smell of urine and urinating, like in adverts 
for Widmer Carbamid Cream Carbamid cream for a healthy skin and for a gel for tooth 
bleaching  Carbamid Peroxid Gel 35% zum Zähne bleichen. 
Another example would be the consistent use of diabetes in stead of sukkersyke (‘sugar 
disease’) by the Norwegian diabetes association in order to avoid depicting their members 
as people suffering from a disease. Diabetics are instead presented as social group with 
some special needs in order to lead a normal life like the rest of us. And – as well known in 
the world of adverts – we even find quasi-terminology used for marketing purposes like the 
use of gardol in a toothpaste generally guarding your teeth against caries and other 
unpleasant phenomena. 
In these examples hard core terminology  -  and what could have been terminology -  is used 
to not because the recipient of the text is expected to be a field specialist,  but because the 
use of terminology is supposed to have some sort of marketing effect: in the case of 
carbamid a possible negative effect for the promotion of the product should be avoided, in 
the case of diabetes the social status of  a group of patients is redefined and in the case of 
gardol positive connotations for the sale of the product are triggered by the use of a 
linguistically sophisticated terminological fake  (‘ the product guarding your teeth’). In order 
to obtain the intended marketing effect , terminological PFSD is used in spite of the huge 
gap in field knowledge between the sender and the target  groups. These terms are not used 
for descriptive purposes, but to give the impression of an expert status and/or connotatively 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
 
8
denoting a field in a way promoting economic or political goals. This appellative use of 
terminology takes advantage of the field knowledge deficit of the target groups in order to 
create a meaning coinciding with specific appellative, not descriptive goals. 
3   Conclusion and final hypothesis 
On the basis of  the theoretical statements and as shown in the examples, the translation of 
terminological elements in texts is carried out as ‘lexeme-in-function’: Both the specific 
intention of the translation (the intended effect(s) of the target text in a specific situation by 
an intended target group) and the specific socio-lingual context of the translation (socio-
cultural factors of the target group of the source text and that of the target text) constrain the 
lexicalisation and grammaticalisation of  meaning, both generally and with regard to the 
lexicalisation of  onomastic fields in professional communication. The specific function of a 
given onomastic field in a given communicative situation is thus the core of any analysis of 
terminology. It is important to emphasize once again that function is defined as the intended 
effect by a specific target group in a specific situation and not as the real effect by all sorts of 
readers of a given text in all sorts of situations.  
In order to fill in these onomastic fields we would like to propose the notion of PSFD, which 
could be defined as a scale of denotations in professional communication ranging from 
internationally normed terminology with a highest possible level of specialist knowledge on 
the one hand to singular use of lexemes from everyday language on the other. The 
relevance of PFSD as a scale of referential and social meaning  is clearly seen in our 
examples: Depending on the specific interaction in a specific the situation onomastic fields 
are filled differently, even in one and the same text. Thus a flexible concept of professional 
use of language to fulfil different  communicative purposes, based on the notion of meaning 
as a social category,  seems far more descriptively adequate than referring to terminology as 
a static system of lexical realisation  of given semantic fields. 
This does not, however, mean that terminology should be ‘abolished’  as a category for 
describing lexical phenomena in  LSP discourse. Terminology could be identified as those 
pre-defined PFSDs designed for the use in specific LSP discourse, like in military discourse, 
air speak, police speak. In these situations the use of specific lexemes for specific 
denotations are prescribed by law. But they are also frequently used as a convention in 
scientific discourse between specialists of the same field and even as a means of promoting 
products with a fairly vague or even no connection to a specific onomastic field.  Thus, as 
shown in the examples, the situation and its participants decide what level of PFSD is 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
 
9
chosen for a particular communicative purpose. In our examples, even the use of hard core 
terminology depends on the needs of a given interaction. This clearly shows that terminology 
first of all is a social category: It is not about a lexeme as corresponding to a predefined 
concept, but about how a lexeme is contextualised in a specific social setting. This again can 
be described by means of PFSD as a yardstick for interpreting the lexical realisation of 
onomastic fields in professional communication.  The PFSD is thus a prototypically 
organised scale for the interpretation, not the classification of central aspects of professional 
communication.   
With regard to translation the PFSD concept seems highly relevant. Since translation has 
been defined as an interlingual reconstitution of meaning in a different socio-cultural setting, 
onomastic fields that are   terminologically lexicalised in one language for one specific target 
group, may need a quite different type of PFSD for another target group in another 
language. As shown in the translation of medical terminology in the American text on eye 
diseases by diabetes, the change of target groups in the Norwegian source text resulted in 
the use of different parts of the PFSD scale, not in a direct translation terms according to 
some fixed system for how medical terminology should be translated. Translation thus 
implies a contrastive analysis of the genre and situation of the source text and the designed 
situation for the target text. Depending on the use of a tertium comparationis 3  in the specific 
translation situation the problem of lexicalisation of onomastic fields in the translation of 
professional communication can be solved by using PFSD as a scale for the interpretation of 
a functional, target group oriented professional communication.  
This again calls for a dominant status of text function as the overall intended effect by a 
given act of communication as the dominant category for the analysis of professional 
communication, as also stated and discussed in e.g. [3], 7-20. As we have seen in the 
present study,   the use of different PFSD is connected to both appellative and informative 
functions and to shifts between these within one and the same text. But not only these two 
functions and variations between them would be relevant. It would be highly relevant to carry 
out research on other functional groups like obligative and declarative text functions, see [1], 
31ff. and [2], 102ff.  for further reading.  
 
                                                 
3  A thorough discussion of the notion of tertium comparationis in translation analysis is carried out in 
the first chapter of [4]. 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
 
10
Bibliographic references 
[1]  
Adamzik, Kirsten:  Textlinguistik (= Germanistische Arbeitshefte 40). Tübingen 2004, 
176 pages.  
[2]  
Brinker, Klaus: Textlinguistik (=Grundlagen der Germanistik 29). Berlin 2001, 168 
pages. 
[3]  
Brünner,  Gisela: Wirtschaftskommunikation (= Reihe Germanistische Linguistik 213). 
Tübingen 2000, 331 pages. 
[4]  
Chesterman, Andrew:  Contrastive Functional Analysis (= Pragmatics &beyond. New 
series 47). Amsterdam  1998, 230 pages.  
[5]  
Ditlevsen, Marianne Grove et al.: Sprog på arbejde. Fredriksberg 2003, 227 pages. 
[6]  
Gurwood, Andrew S./ Sowka, Joseph W. (April 2007): Handbook of Ocular Disease 
Management (=www.revoptom.com) 
[7]  
Hustad, Jon: En time med Barth. In: Forskerforum 2/2006, 18-20. Oslo, 3 pages. 
[8]  
Kvam, Sigmund: Fachkommunikation und Klassifizierung von Fachtexten.  
In: Fachsprache 2/1998, 29-36. Vienna, 8 pages. 
[9]  
Nord, Christiane: „Wer nimmt nun mal den ersten Satz?“ In: Lauer,  Angelika: 
Übersetzungswissenschaft im Umbruch(= Festschrift für Wolfram Wilss zum 70. 
Geburtstag), 313 – 327. Tübingen 1996,  15 pages.  
[10]  Shannon, Claude E. /Weaver, Warren: The Mathematical Theory of Communication. 
Urbana 1949,  117 pages. 
 
 
 
Prof. Dr. Sigmund Kvam 
Østfold University College 
Remmen  
N-1757 Halden 
Norway 
Tel: +47 69215243 
E-mail: sigmund.kvam@hiof.no 
 
 
