SOURCE: http://eleto.gr/download/Conferences/14th Conference/HeLaTerm2023_Call-for-Papers_EN.pdf

ELETO 
ΕΛΛΗΝΙΚΗ ΕΤΑΙΡΕΙΑ ΟΡΟΛΟΓΙΑΣ 
HELLENIC SOCIETY FOR TERMINOLOGY 
Syngrou Av. 63, 11745 Athens GREECE 
Tel.: +30 210 8662069, +30 6974321009, +30 6949573108 
E-mail.: valeonti@otenet.gr  
Website: www.eleto.gr  
 
14th Conference  
“Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
9–11 November, 2023 – Online 
Dedicated to the philosopher and mathematician Hypatia (370–415) 
Call for papers 
The Hellenic Society for Terminology (ELETO) in cooperation with the National and Kapodistrian University of 
Athens (NKUA), the University of Cyprus (UCY), the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki (AUTH) and other 
organizations, which will be announced on the relevant web page, organize the 14th Conference “Hellenic 
Language and Terminology”. The conference will be held online, on 9–11 November 2023. 
The aim of the Conference is to present the current situation of the Greek language from a terminological point of 
view, as well as methods, practices and tools of Terminology science, and their application in the Greek language 
environment – monolingual and/or interlingual –, with a view to promote terminological research and contribute to 
the present-day terminological enrichment of the Greek language. 
Themes of the Conference: 
1 
Linguistic–ontological principles of terminology 
Principles and methods of language and logic adopted, formulated and applied in terminology. Terminology as the 
interface between language and knowledge. Methods, mechanisms and rules of naming resulted from intra-lingual or 
interlingual study of designations (terms and names) and definitions of concepts. Theoretical, synchronic and/or 
diachronic examination of terms in monolingual and/or multilingual environment. 
2 
Didactics and terminology 
Didactics of terminology. Undergraduate and postgraduate lessons and/or seminars in terminology. Learning issues in 
terminology. Terminological aspects of teaching lessons in specific subject fields. Concepts and terms of didactics. 
3 
Terminology in specific subject fields – Lexicographical and terminographical studies 
Synchronic and/or diachronic consideration of terminologies and terminology problems in specific subject fields. 
Systems of terms in specific subject fields in relation to corresponding concept systems. Lexicographical and 
terminographical studies in specific subject fields. 
4 
Terminology and translation 
The role of terms in translation theory and practice. Application of terminology principles in translation. Concept-
oriented interlingual correspondence and “equivalence” of terms between an original and its translation versus word-
oriented “translation” of terms. Translation assisted by Internet terminological resources. Concepts and terms of 
translation studies. 
5 
Terminological resources 
Special monolingual or multilingual dictionaries, printed or electronic, local or on line / on the Internet. Term collections, 
or term bases containing designations, concept definitions and other terminological information. Special corpora 
offered for research and support of terminological resources. Application of new technologies in terminology practice 
and in terminology services provision. 
6 
Standardization of terminology 
Intralingual validation and standardization of terms by determining preferred and admitted terms as valid terms. 
internationalization of concepts, and interlingual correspondence, validation and standardization of equivalent terms. 
Term proposals for validation and standardization. Standardization of special language texts. 
7 
Dissemination and use of terms – Terminology policies and regulation 
Ways and means for disseminating special terms and terminologies. Intra-field and inter-field matters of terminology 
information. Regulatory tools of terminology policy (publications, laws, specifications, standards). 
8 
Activities of organizations and bodies for terminology 
Activities for production, collection, processing, publication and provision of terms and terminology services by 
national, regional, and/or international bodies (organizations, companies, associations, committees, groups). 
Terminology events organization. 
Special theme of the 14th Conference 
9 
Terminology and mathematics 
Terminology of mathematics (consideration: diachronic and/or synchronic, intra-linguistic and/or inter-linguistic). 
Mathematics in Terminology. Language of mathematics and mathematical literacy. 
E 
Λ  
Ε  Τ  Ο 
L 
E
2 
 
 
Languages: 
Official languages of the Conference will be Greek and English. 
Critical dates: 
Submission of abstracts by  
10 April 2023 
Approval of abstracts by  
20 May 2023 
Submission of full papers by  
20 July 2023 
Abstracts and papers: 
Participants wishing to present a paper at the Conference are invited to submit an abstract in two electronic 
copies, as .doc files compatible with MS Office 97-2003. The abstract should be written in one of the official 
languages of the Conference and should neither be less than 200 words nor more than 300 words. At the end of 
the text, relative references should be given excluding author’s own papers; the number of words of the references 
will not be included in the total word count of the abstract. 
Each contributor may be a) the single author of one paper and co-author in one more, or b) co-author of at most 
two papers. Submissions from students may be accepted only if co-authored by the relevant supervising 
professors. 
The following items must appear on the page of the first copy of the abstract: 
a) title/affiliation, place and dates of the Conference: 14th Conference “Hellenic Language and 
Terminology”, Online, 9–11 November, 2023 
b) title of the paper  
c) the theme(s) (see above) the paper comes under and 
d) name, title/profession, tel. no, and e-mail address of the author(s). 
On the second copy only a), b) and c) should be written. 
The two files, corresponding to the two abstract copies, should be sent by e-mail, as attached files, to: 
valeonti@otenet.gr  
Following the examination of the abstracts by the Scientific Committee of the Conference, the authors of the 
selected papers will be notified and receive the necessary information for the preparation and submission of the full 
texts of their papers. 
 
 
 
Information: 
Conference Secretariat: tel. +30 210 7245534, e-mail: tsiamasge54@outlook.com.gr  
Organizing Committee: tel. +30 6974321009, e-mail: valeonti@otenet.gr  
Webpage: https://eleto.gr/en/14th-conference-hellenic-language-and-terminology-online-9-11-november-2023/  
