SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/ELETO-EAFT_Conference_2013-11-07/ELETO-EAFT-Symposium-2013_Jordi%20Bover_RosaColomerInmemoriam_EN.pdf

 
 
 
 
EAFT–ELETO Symposium 
“National Languages and Terminology  
in Higher Education, Science & Technology” 
Athens, Greece, 7 November 2013 
 
Rosa Colomer, in memoriam 
Jordi Bover 
 
Before starting my presentation, I would like to dedicate a short commemorative speech to Rosa 
Colomer: the person who would have been here instead of myself if an unfair cancer hadn’t 
crossed her entire life ten months from now. Today, she had been sitting here to speak about the 
Catalan situation as a TERMCAT director, the Centre for Catalan Terminology. As far as I know, 
even knowing she had few hopes to get over her illness, she considered the option to be here. 
Unfortunately, although her strong fight against cancer, last 23rd October, just fifteen days ago, her 
body said it was enough.  
 
Rosa had a special attention towards TERMCAT participation in International networks and 
projects in cooperation in the frame of terminological scope. Probably, this will brought her to 
accept EAFT presidency and some time later the Secretariat of the Association. Also, during the 
ten years in which she holds TERMCAT direction, the Cercaterm, our national term bank became 
an International reference.  
 
Rosa Colomer is responsible for the consolidation of TERMCAT as a terminology model for 
working both at a national and at an international level, but for all of us, her colleagues, the years 
we have worked under her direction have meant something much more important: a privileged 
occasion for personal and professional development, for involvement in our work and for 
commitment to the language of the country she loved so much, by working together in solidarity. As 
people working with language, we know that words only acquire meaning when they are used in 
context. In the context of all the years we have been fortunate enough to share our lives with her, 
to us words like enthusiasm, rigour, leadership, respect and, especially, generosity, take on a new 
meaning.  
 
As I mentioned before, I’m convinced that today she would be so happy to be here. It comes to my 
mind how much in love she was with the Mediterranean Sea, especially the Minorcan one, where 
she used to spend her summers holidays. This is why I’m so pleased to share with you a poem 
from the Catalan writer, Salvador Espriu, coinciding with his birth centenary. I have also come 
across to this poem when communicating Rosa's recent demise and I think that is particularly 
adequate at this circumstance. The poem talks about a ship that sails out of port for the tranquil 
open sea where hope is all: 
 
“La fruita d’or, llunyania. 
  
—Deixa enrere el record 
de la perduda tarda. 
Deixa enrere la veu 
de la muntanya. 
Navega fora port, 
a l’esperança. 
  
Calma, illa, veler, 
la fruita d’or.” 
 
Rest in Peace, Rosa. 
 
