SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/12th%20Conference/Papers-and-speakers/12th_08-01-01_HatziolouElisavet-SofiouStamatia_paper1_V04.pdf

ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
139 
 
 8    Explaining the use of the prefix Cyber- 
    
Elizabeth Hatziolou, Stamatia Sofiou 
ABSTRACT 
The prefix cyber- is one of the most used prefixes in our information age. Scientists use it in their works; 
politicians employ it in official documents concerning problems to be solved, like economics, national 
security, terrorism and war; students are taught about it in technology classes, i.e. web blogs and 
websites; and the general public exploit it in order to benefit from it by exchanging information through 
speaking or writing. Such is the popularity of the prefix that it is being used by most people in the world 
most of the time. The reason is not difficult to comprehend. Cyber- is a prefix easy to remember and 
spell. Attached to the beginning of an old word it creates a new one with a different meaning, aiding 
people in communicating in different contexts. The result of the extensive use of the prefix was the 
coining of the term cyberology, meaning the study of the Net and its applications, like cybernetics and 
cyborgs, cyberspace and cyber war that enable the computer network to respond to threats to digital 
computers, either domestically or internationally. The study explains how the new cyber- vocabulary has 
developed through the decades (from the Sixties to the Two Thousands) and how the different types of 
cyber- words, i.e. cyber cubicle, cyber repression, cyber deterrence, cyber toll, cyberocracy, Cyberia, 
cyberformance or cyber warfare, to mention but a few, are being used in order to make our life and work 
easier. 
KEYWORDS:  Computer science, cyber culture, cybernetics, cyber security, cyborg, cyber risk, cyber 
war.    
Εξηγώντας τη χρήση του προθέματος Cyber- 
    
Ελισάβετ Χατζηόλου, Σταματία Σοφίου 
ΠΕΡΙΛΗΨΗ 
Το πρόθημα κυβερνο- είναι ένα από τα πιo συχνά χρησιμοποιούμενα προθήματα στον αιώνα της 
πληροφορίας που ζούμε. Οι επιστήμονες το χρησιμοποιούν στις ακαδημαϊκές εργασίες τους· οι 
πολιτικοί το μεταχειρίζονται στα επίσημα έγγραφά τους, που αφορούν στα προβλήματα που 
αντιμετωπίσουν, όπως είναι η εθνική ασφάλεια, η τρομοκρατία και ο πόλεμος· οι σπουδαστές 
διδάσκονται για αυτό στο μάθημα της πληροφορικής· και το κοινό το αξιοποιεί όταν ανταλλάσσει 
γραπτές και προφορικές πληροφορίες. Τέτοια είναι η απήχηση του προθήματος που ο περισσότερος 
κόσμος το χρησιμοποιεί κάθε μέρα. Ο λόγος είναι απλός. Το πρόθημα είναι εύκολο να απομνημονευτεί 
και να χρησιμοποιηθεί στον προφορικό και στον γραπτό λόγο επειδή όταν μπει στην αρχή μιας λέξης 
της καθομιλουμένης δημιουργεί μια καινούργια λέξη με διαφορετικό νόημα, βοηθώντας έτσι την  
επικοινωνία σε διάφορα επίπεδα. Το αποτέλεσμα της εκτεταμένης χρήσης του προθήματος ήταν η 
επινόηση του όρου κυβερνολογία που σημαίνει τη μελέτη του ∆ικτύου Η/Υ και των εφαρμογών του, 
όπως κυβερνητική και κυβερνο-οργανισμός, κυβερνοχώρος και κυβερνο-πόλεμος, που καθιστούν το 
δίκτυο ικανό να ανταποκρίνεται σε εγχώριες και διεθνείς απειλές στους Η/Υ. Η μελέτη εξηγεί πως το 
κυβερνο-λεξιλόγιο αναπτύχθηκε από τη δεκαετία του 1960 έως τη δεκαετία του 2000 και πως οι 
διαφορετικοί τύποι των καινούργιων όρων όπως, για παράδειγμα, κυβερνο-δωμάτιο, κυβερνο-
καταστολή, κυβερνο-αποτροπή, κυβερνο-χτύπημα, κυβερνο-κρατία, κυβερνο-τιμωρία, κυβερνο-απόδοση 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
140 
 
ή κυβερνο-πόλεμος χρησιμοποιούνται για να κάνουν την γραπτή και προφορική επικοινωνία 
ευκολότερη. 
Λέξεις-Κλειδιά: Επιστήμη των Η/Υ, κυβερνο-κουλτούρα, κυβερνητική, κυβερνο-ασφάλεια, κυβερνο-
οργανισμός, κυβερνο-διακύβευμα, κυβερνο-πόλεμος.   
 
 
 
 
0   Introduction 
The prefix cyber- is used in terms related to computers and the Internet. It comes from the 
Greek verb κυβερνώ, which means to ‘pilot’. An example of how the prefix is used in Greek 
is the noun κυβερνήτης, meaning ‘pilot’.  
The prefix appeared in the early Fifties when a group of scientists in fields ranging from 
social sciences to engineering began to employ it in scientific works. Its extensive use 
resulted in the coining of cyberology, a term that means the study of the Internet and its 
applications. Since the Fifties the scientific field of cyberology has grown to include 
cybernetics, an interdisciplinary study concerning control systems, for example, a missile 
control system; electrical network theory, i.e. the collection of interconnected components; 
mechanical engineering, the discipline that applies engineering to design and manufacture; 
evolutionary biology, a subfield of biology  that studies the evolutionary process producing 
the diversity of life on Earth; neuroscience or the scientific study of the nervous 
system; anthropology, the study of human behaviour and society in the past and present 
and psychology, concerning behaviour, conscious / unconscious phenomena and thought. 
1   Main body 
Cybernetics became important because the term reminded people that cyber- attached to 
the beginning of a word created a new word. So, the formation of new, compound words that 
included the prefix continued in the Seventies and Eighties to include a great deal of 
temporary or nonce words; lexemes, ‘λεξήματα,’ units of vocabulary that may exist in a 
number of different forms, e.g. ‘play’ existing as ‘plays, playing, player, played’; and the 
different forms of lemma, ‘λήμμα’ or the headword of a dictionary entry, employed in order to 
solve problems of communication. For example, cyber cubicle was coined to mean a small 
area for private use in an Internet Café; cybercafé or cyber pub applies to Internet places 
and cyber friend means a friend with whom one communicates only through the Net; cyber 
lover implies a distance relationship and cyber sex is a situation in which two people 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
141 
 
connected remotely through computer network send each other  messages describing a 
sexual experience; cyber party refers to a political party whose relations to its supporters 
occurs through email or texting instead of being based on membership; cyber snob 
implies an individual who thinks that his / her knowledge of online items (jargon and 
acronyms) makes him / her an expert; and cyber culture is the culture arising from the use of 
computer networks for communication, entertainment and business.  
In the urban subculture there developed terms, like 
cyber goth to refer to goth, rave and rivet head fashion, 
involving 
young 
men 
and 
women 
who 
listen 
to electronic music more often than rock music and 
buy attire from Cyberdog, i.e. a shop in London that 
specializes in bright fluorescent clothing. In fact, the 
terms cyber-sick and cyber tedium appeared in the 
Eighties and Nineties to refer to the mass of derivative 
words that appeared after William Gibson (1948- ) the 
Canadian-American writer invented cyberspace in his 1984 novel Neuromancer although he 
had already invented it two years previously in his short story called Omni. Even adverbs, 
like cyberly (as in “He’s been harassing her cyberly”) or cyber-sheepishly, meaning in a 
manner showing lack of self-assertion concerning the Net, and adjectives like cyberish (as in 
cyberish art or cyberish images) have been coined to help Internet users to exchange 
information.  
Besides these compound words, there appeared others that relate to politics, espionage and 
war. Cyborg, combining the ‘cyb-’ of cyber with the ‘org-‘ of organism, refers to a robot, a 
man-machine or android, capable of interacting in the 
environment for which it was built with the help of a 
neuron electrode that allows elaborate interactions. 
The term cyborg was first used in the Seventies in 
scientific publications and TV shows. In fact, instead 
of cyborgs the compound nouns cyber men and cyber 
women were used to refer to individuals with 
superhuman power (bionic implants) that were 
employed as spies by government agencies.  
Another term that evolved through the use of cyber- and is associated with government is 
cyberocracy, from cyber- and -cracy, meaning authority. Actually it denotes ‘rule’ and refers 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
142 
 
to interconnected computer networks. David Ronfeldt, an American political analyst, claims 
that although there is no cyberocracy in any of the countries of the world today, there are 
cybercratic elements, like violent treatment, especially in developed countries. A cybercratic 
government, a Machine Rule government, would quickly and effectively file 100% of its 
people plus any relevant foreigners, like refugees and immigrants.   
Other cyber- formations that have appeared since the Seventies include cyber law, the area 
of law that deals with the relationship of the Internet to technological and electronic 
elements, including computers, software and hardware, and information systems. Cyber law 
prevents damage from cybercriminal activities by protecting information access, privacy, 
communications, intellectual property (IP) and freedom of speech related to the use of the 
Internet including websites, email, computers, cell phones, software and hardware, like data 
storage devices.  
Cyber space or virtual reality developed to refer to the notional environment within which 
electronic communication (especially via the Internet) occurs. Cyber space remains the most 
popular cyber term used to refer to the world of electronic communications (including the 
Net). In the Eighties, there appeared compound words, like cyber world, cyber land, cyber 
sphere and Cyberia (from Siberia, i.e. cyber- + -ia, relating to punishment for cyber criminals 
or cyber terrorists) to denote the realm of information technology and electronic 
communication, especially the Internet. In addition, the combining form, meaning computer 
net work or virtual reality, used in the formation of compound words, like cyber talk, cyber art 
and cyber fashion is used to express strange visions of the future regarded as still to come. 
The emergence of e- in compound words like e-commerce or e-currency changed things in 
the Nineties and Two Thousands. Influenced by the extensive use of e-mail, the letter e- 
assumed the place of cyber in the formation of technical words, replacing cyber formations. 
So, instead of websites, explaining the term cyber commerce Internet domains now discuss 
e-commerce and e-currency. 
Despite the appearance of e- formations, terms like cyber war, cyber attack, cyber crime, 
cyber terrorism and cyber bullying are more prominent. This may be due to the clearer 
distinction offered by terms like cyber war against a formation like e-war, which is not quite 
clear. Newspaper articles on the 2014 hacking of Sony (subsequently connected to North 
Korea), the theft by cyber crooks of $1 billion from thirty different banks worldwide, and 
cases of bullying/harassment over digital devices and social networks strengthened the 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
143 
 
importance of cyber terms, like cyber cash, cyber economy, cyber buck, cyber dollar, cyber-
money and other terms that relate to cyber-shopping.  
John Nagel, an American cyber security scientist, has counted more than a hundred words 
formed from cyber- during the last three decades. After cyber space in the early Eighties, 
cyberpunk appeared in the late Eighties to denote a subgenre of science fiction depicting life 
in the future and focusing on decadent life and advanced technological and scientific 
achievements, i.e. artificial intelligence and cybernetics put side by side with a social 
breakdown or radical change in the social order. The invention of cyber punk generated a 
great deal of derivative words, like cyber-scribe, cyber-publisher and cyber-novelist. When 
the Press became involved in the ‘game’ of inventing words related to electronic 
communication or its technology, there appeared terms, like cyber-journalists, who use 
cyber libraries, review cyber thrillers and write in cyber zines (short for magazines). 
Scientists, writers and journalists continued to attach the prefix to science fiction characters, 
like “Doctor Cyber,” a comics’ super villain; “Cybermen,” a fictional race of cyborgs who are 
the most persistent enemies of the hero of the British science fiction TV series Doctor Who; 
“Cyber Crime” or cyber investigations, as opposed to the forensic investigations, seen in 
Crime Scene Investigation (CSI), the American police drama television series; the most 
persistent enemies of the British hero of the series; “Cyber Crime” or cyber investigations, as 
opposed to the forensic investigations, seen in Crime Scene Investigation (CSI), the 
American police drama television series; and Cyberchase, a Canadian-American animated 
educational TV series that involves three children from Earth brought into Cyberspace, a 
digital universe, in order to protect the world from the villain Hacker by means of problem-
solving skills in conjunction with basic Maths - in the presence of Digit, a cybird that they 
meet in cyberspace.  
The film industry is not the only organized activity connected with contemporary arts. 
Cyberformance, from cyber- and -formance, from performance, has been coined to refer to 
live theatrical performances in which remote participants work together in real time through 
the medium of the Net, employing technologies like Chat applications. Cyberformance is 
also known as online performance and digital theatre.  There is as yet no consensus on 
which term should be preferred although cyberformance has the advantage of compactness, 
as it is commonly employed by users of a special application to designate a special type of 
performance art activity taking place in a cyber-artistic environment. Cyberformance can be 
created and presented entirely online, for a distributed online audience that participates 
through internet-connected computers anywhere in the world. It can be presented to an 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
144 
 
audience in a physical theatre or gallery venue with some or all of the performers appearing 
via the Net; or it can be a hybrid of the two approaches, with both remote and proximal 
audiences and/or performers. 
In the United States, businessmen, influenced by the phenomenon of cyber-mania, have 
informed their customers that Black Friday is not the day to buy cheap toys for children. 
Shoppers should wait until Cyber Monday to get even better discounts. A toy company has 
even coined a new term Cyber Week, implying more discounts for toys throughout the week. 
What is more, entrepreneurs in Asia have established cyber dhaba, or roadside stalls, with 
computer facilities, where people can use the Net to search for information, send e-mails or 
engage in commercial transactions.  
These interventions of contemporary science have created the term known as “virtual 
reality” or Internet fantasy ways of escaping from the stress of life and living in a world of 
cyberspace. Since the Eighties and Nineties the interventions have resulted in the increase 
of the number of cyber words from cybernaut, an expert or habitual user of the Internet, to 
cyborg and the new vocabulary mentioned above.  
Besides programs that provide internet access, cyber- is used to refer to cybercrime or 
criminal activities carried out by means of computers or the Net. Cybercrimes are crimes in 
which computers are the objects of illegal acts, like hacking, phishing and spamming, and 
child pornography. Cybercriminals use computer technology to access personal information 
and business trade secrets. Using the Net for malicious purposes, they employ computers 
for communication, document and data storage. Criminals who perform cyber crimes, i.e. 
illegal activities, are often referred to as hackers. Common types of cybercrime include 
online bank information theft, identity theft, online predatory crimes and unauthorized 
computer access. When caught, cyber criminals hire cyber lawyers - experts on cyber law or 
the law relating to online communications and the implications of computers. 
Serious crimes like cyber terrorism are now of great concern. Cyber terrorism is the use of 
the Net to conduct violent acts that result in political and/or ideological gains through 
intimidation and acts of deliberate disruption of computer networks by means of tools, like 
malicious software and hardware methods. Cybercrime comprises two categories. 
 
Crimes that aim at computer networks and devices, including viruses and denial-of-
service (DoS) attacks. 
 
Crimes that aim at computer networks to advance criminal activities, like cyber stalking -
the use of the Net to stalk an individual or organization in order to accuse them falsely 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
145 
 
and defame them; offer sex for money; engage in identity theft and phishing, and the 
attempt to obtain sensitive information, like usernames, passwords and credit 
card details by disguising as someone trustworthy in an electronic communication. 
Government organizations, in charge of Internet policing, aim at fighting cybercrime or 
searching for cybercrime fugitives who have committed bank fraud or devices that access 
personal electronic information. They investigate crimes including hacking or gaining 
unauthorized access to computer data and copyright infringement; issues related 
to confidential information lost or intercepted unlawfully; censorship, the suppression of 
published or broadcast material considered offensive or a threat to security, and propaganda 
or deceptive information that is widely spread. In India, for example, there exists an agency 
called Cyber Crime Investigation Cell whose major purpose is to fight computer crimes, 
enforce provisions of India’s Information Technology or take measures to protect cyber 
security. In Greece, the Cyber Crime Department of the Hellenic Police, founded in the 
Nineties, was the conception of a Greek police officer trained by the United States Federal 
Bureau of Investigation (FBI). The officer started operations with the help of two more police 
officers. Nowadays, the unit is operated by at least eighty qualified law enforcement agents 
and civilians.  
The importance of the work of government agencies, dealing with activities of the nature of 
groups engaged in cybercrime, cannot be exaggerated. Nor can government activities, 
handling cyber attacks and cyber threats, referred to as cyber warfare, like the targeting of 
computers, online control systems and networks, 
be overstressed. As cybercrime involves both 
offensive and defensive operations that are 
related to cyber espionage,  countries like China, 
Iran, Israel, North Korea, Russia, the United 
Kingdom and the United States  have developed 
cyber capabilities to engage in cyber warfare, both 
offensively and defensively in order to prevent 
cyber 
attacks 
against 
infrastructure; 
reduce 
national vulnerability; minimize damage and 
recovery time. To prevent the harmful effects of the new ‘war’ called cyber warfare, 
defensive measures have been established such as Computer Security, the security to 
computer parts, like computer hardware or the backup of the information stored in 
computers, and cyber security, the threats that can be caused in the Cyber Computer - 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
146 
 
Online and Offline world, like viruses, stealing personal or sensitive government information. 
To combat cybercrime and increase security, a number of cyber countermeasures have 
been established. It is defined as a system that serves to prevent the effects of a cyber 
attack against a computer, server or network. Recently there has been an increase in the 
number of international cyber attacks. In 2013, there was a 91% increase in cyber attacks 
and a 62% increase in security breaches. “The Convention on Cyber Crime and its 
Explanatory Report” (drawn by the Council of Europe in Strasbourg, France, with the 
participation of the Council of Europe’s observer states (Canada, Japan, the Philippines, 
South Africa and the United States) was adopted by the Committee of Ministers of the 
Council of Europe in 2001 becoming active in 2004. So far sixty states have ratified the 
treaty, which deals with Internet and computer crime by harmonizing national laws, improved 
their techniques of investigation and increased cooperation. Russia has refused to adopt the 
treaty and cooperate in law enforcement investigations relating to cybercrime because she 
did not participate in the drafting. The “Additional Protocol to the Convention on Cybercrime” 
came into force in 2006. The countries that have ratified it are required to criminalize the 
dissemination of racist and xenophobic material through computer systems.  
The effort to prevent cyber warfare or the use of digital attacks, like computer viruses and 
hacking by one country to disrupt the computer systems of another and create destruction, 
has increased. The reason is the attacks that have damaged enemy infrastructure, fighting 
alongside troops using conventional weapons, like guns and missiles. The combination of a 
cyber warfare arms race and absence of rules governing online conflict imply that there is a 
cyber risk that incidents may escalate. As contemporary societies rely more on computer 
systems linked to the internet, they become more vulnerable. If power stations, refineries, 
banks and air-traffic-control systems are attacked, people would lose their lives and 
property.  
As with nuclear arms control, powerful countries need to consider how to restrict the threat 
of cyber war (or cyber attacks) before it is too late. Malicious computer programs, like Trojan 
horse, developed by hackers disguised as legitimate software in order to gain access to the 
systems of target users should be restrained. Users are tricked by attractive social media 
advertisements that direct them to malicious websites, loading Trojan horses on their 
systems. With the use of the malicious computer programs, cyber-criminals spy on the 
victim, gain illegal access to his/her system and extract sensitive data. 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
147 
 
A cyber crisis occurred in Iran in 2010 when the 
country became the victim of a cyber-attack. A 
combined effort by the United States and Israel 
managed to infiltrate the country’s nuclear facility. 
The infiltration was called ‘Stuxnet,’ a strong cyber 
weapon, referred to as zero day. A cyber-worm, 
Stuxnet damaged Tehran’s atomic program and 
caused great delays. The Iranian government claims 
that it has discovered solutions to the worm and that its cyber defence is now better in terms 
of cyber warfare technology. So far, no cyber activist has claimed responsibility for the 
cybercrime. 
Certain cybercrimes would have been avoided if the practice of cyber hygiene had been 
established. Cyber hygiene refers to the practice and steps that users of computers and 
other devices need to take to maintain system health and improve online security. The 
practice should become part of a routine to ensure the safety of identity and other details 
that could be stolen or corrupted. Like physical hygiene, cyber hygiene should be regularly 
conducted to keep away natural deterioration and common threats. The benefit of cyber 
hygiene, or having a routine cyber hygiene procedure in place for computers and software, 
is security.  
Maintenance is necessary for computers and software to run efficiently, as files become 
fragmented and programs become outdated, increasing the risk of vulnerabilities. Routines 
include maintenance to spot problems and prevent them from occurring. A system that is 
well-maintained is less likely to be vulnerable to cyber security risks. Security is perhaps the 
most important reason to incorporate a cyber hygiene routine. Hackers, identity thieves, 
advanced viruses and intelligent malware are all part 
of a hostile environment. Because predicting threats 
can be difficult, preparing for them in order to prevent 
them is feasible with the appropriate cyber hygiene 
practices. All hardware programs like computers, 
phones or connected devices, software programs and 
online 
applications 
used, 
need 
maintenance, 
otherwise vulnerabilities, like loss of data, misplaced 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
148 
 
data, security breach, out of date software and old security software, may lead to serious 
problems. Best practices to cyber hygiene include, among other things, password changes, 
back-up data and limiting users to their own data. 
2   Conclusion 
Concerning the future of our age of information, acknowledged experts on cyber policy and 
cybercrime, relate how cyber security has metamorphosed from an issue of limited interest 
to an issue of vital concern for national security, economic security and foreign policy. They 
relate the well-known international cyber security incidents, like the North Korean hacking of 
Sony Pictures and the Russian interference in democratic processes in America and 
Europe, to prove the truth of their argument. They claim that by combining information 
technology with diplomacy countries would experience a new more peaceful era, as cyber 
diplomacy or the evolution of public diplomacy would include and use the platforms of 
communication of the 21st century. As Professor Jan Melissen explains in his work The New 
Public Diplomacy: Soft Power in International Relations, cyber-diplomacy links the power of 
innovation in communication and information technology to diplomacy. Cyber-diplomacy is 
founded on the concept that new communication technologies offer new opportunities to 
interact with the public by adopting a network approach and making the most of an 
increasingly multi centric global and interdependent system. Cyber diplomacy, together with 
the rise of soft power in international relations, would request transnational collaboration to 
produce solutions to difficult problems. Thus, cyber diplomacy is more than a technical 
instrument of foreign policy. It is part of the changing of the nature of fundamental structure 
of international relations.  
Both small and large countries, whether under democratic or authoritarian regimes, have 
recently displayed great interest in cyber diplomacy. Like cyber security, a technical issue 
that has economic and political dimensions and demands collaboration with professions to 
produce solutions to problems, cyber diplomacy requires collaboration among government 
agencies, organizations and industries. The establishment of an international cooperation 
would result in the establishment of cyber norms that would punish cyber dissidents for their 
behaviour. Yet, whereas the Western world shares information, Russia and China are 
among the countries that require absolute sovereignty in cyberspace. So, until the bridges 
between cyber diplomacy and the technical community have been built, people must 
remember that the Net is not operated by governments only but by the private sector as 
well. The Net is an international issue that different groups of people employ together. 
Christopher Painter, a State Department cyber coordination expert, claims that international 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
149 
 
law should apply to cyberspace as law does to the physical world. There are a set of norms 
many countries agree to, like the idea that a nation should not attack infrastructures meant 
for the public good. Countries around the world need to adhere to these norms, he claims. 
This must be the role of diplomacy; the role of building alliances and showing international 
cooperation that would help a nation’s diplomatic efforts to create an open, interoperable 
and reliable Internet.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References 
[ 1]  Crews, T.J. “What is the difference between computer security and cyber security?” 
<https://www.quora.com/What-is-the-difference-between-computer-security-and-cyber-
security>. 
[ 2]  Cyber crime _ Counter measures. <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cybercrime_ 
countermeasures>. 
[ 3]  Cyber-. <https://www.etymonline.com/word/cyber>. 
[ 4]  Cyber. <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyber>. 
[ 5]  Cyber. <http://www.dictionary.com/browse/cyber>. 
[ 6]  Cyber Chase.” New York, December 23, 1996.  
[ 7]  Cyber crime. <https://www.techopedia.com/definition/2387/cybercrime>. 
[ 8]  Cyberculture. <https://www.wordnik.com/words/cyberculture>. 
[ 9]  Cyber Diplomacy: New tools in the fight against hackers, attackers and other threats.” 
<http://www.cornell.edu/video/cyber-diplomacy-new-tools-against-hackers-attackers>. 
[10]  Cyber diplomacy. <http://www.cornell.edu/video/cyber-diplomacy-new-tools-against-
hackers-attackers>. 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
150 
 
[11]  Cyber Hygiene. <https://digitalguardian.com/blog/what-cyber-hygiene-definition-cyber-
hygiene-benefits-best-practices-and-more>. 
[12]  Cyber is the New Black: Cyber Expert Points to Diplomacy to Solve Global Cyber 
Security Issues.” <https://cornellsun.com/2017/11/16/cyber-is-the-new-black-cyber-
expert-points-to-diplomacy-to-solve-global-cybersecurity-issues/>. 
[13]  Cyber Monday. <https://www.msn.com/en-us/money/companies/wait-until-cyber-
monday-to-buy-your-toy-gifts/ar>. 
[14]  Cyberocracy. <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyberocracy>. 
[15]  Cyber party. <https://www.igi-global.com/dictionary/politically-oriented-database-
applications/6568>.  
[16]  Cyber plague. <http://www.worldwidewords.org/articles/cyber.htm>. 
[17]  Cyber warfare. <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyberwarfare>. 
[18] Cyborg. Microsoft ® Encarta ® 2006. © 1993-2005 Microsoft Corporation. All rights 
reserved. 
[19]  Dhaba <Hindi. Microsoft® Encarta® 2006. © 1993-2005 Microsoft Corporation. All 
rights reserved. 
[20]  Melissen, Jan. <http://culturaldiplomacy.org/academy/pdf/research/books/soft_power/ 
The_New_Public_Diplomacy.pdf>. 
[21]  Nagel, John. <https://www.linkedin.com/in/johngnagel>. 
[22]  Painter, Christopher. <https://cybersecforum.eu/en/speakers/christopher-painter/>. 
[23]  Ronfeldt, David. <http://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/David_Ronfeldt>. 
[24]  Trojan horse. <https://enterprise.comodo.com/what-is-a-trojan-virus.php>. 
 
 
Elizabeth Hatziolou 
Associate Professor 
English Language and Literature 
Hellenic Army Military Academy 
Ηλ-ταχ.: savoula@otenet.gr 
Stamatia Sofiou 
Associate Professor 
French Language and Literature 
Hellenic Army Military Academy 
Ηλ-ταχ.: dr.sofioustamatia@gmail.com 
 
 
