SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/12th%20Conference/Papers-and-speakers/12th_01-09-03_Anastasiadou-Symeonidou_CV1_EN_V02.pdf

ELETO – 12th Conference “Hellenc Language and Terminology” 
Athens, Greece, 7–9 November 2019 
 
 
 
Anna Anastassiadis-Symeonidis 
Emeritus professor of Linguistics 
Department of Philology of the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki 
E-mail: ansym@lit.auth.gr 
 
 
 
 
Curriculum vitae 
Professor Emerita of Linguistics at the Department of Philology of the Aristotle University of 
Thessaloniki. In 1974 she obtained her M.A. from the Paris III University. In 1985 she obtained 
her PhD from the University of Athens. She has taken part in Postgraduate studies at various 
French Universities in Theoretical and Applied Linguistics, such as Lexicology, Lexicography, 
Computational Linguistics and Morphology. From 1991 to 2012 she was the coordinator of 
ERASMUS projects with 7 other European universities. She has taught as visiting professor at 
many European universities such as Sorbonne-Paris IV, INALCO in Paris, the Paris XIII 
University and the University of Cyprus.  
Prof. Anastassiadis-Symeonidis is interested in the study of the Greek Lexicon and vocabulary, in 
compilation of printed and electronic dictionaries, in neology, borrowing, word formation 
(derivation and compounding), multiword units, terminology, spelling and vocabulary teaching. 
Particularly, she has drawn the form and structure of the Dictionary of Modern Greek (1998, 
Institute of Modern Greek Studies of Aristotle University of Thessaloniki – Manolis Triantafyllides 
Foundation, www.komvos.edu.gr ) where she was the editor in chief from 1976-1980. 
She is the author of 5 books, of the Reverse Dictionary of Modern Greek (2002, Institute of 
Modern Greek Studies of Aristotle University of Thessaloniki – Manolis Triantafyllides Foundation, 
www.komvos.edu.gr). She created the macrostructure of the Greek-English Dictionary (100,000 
entries, project Koraïs – 2008, University of Patras/Greece).  She is the author of 2 translations 
on Introduction to Linguistics. She has also authored over 170 papers that have been published 
in various journals and conferences worldwide.   
 
