SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/TermBases/TELETERM_History-EN.pdf

  Ε  Λ   Ο   Τ    Ε    
Μ 
Ο 
Τ 
Ο 
 
TELETERM: 
Database of telecommunication terms 
Resulting from the work of the  
Permanent Group of Telecommunications  
Terminology (MOTO), 
Collective Member of ELETO  
E 
Λ  
Ε  Τ  Ο 
L 
E 
 
August 2022 
 
Short history of the Termbase TELETERM 
 
 
The database of telecommunications terms TELETERM is quadrilingual (Greek, English, French, and 
German) and was created in 1990 by the leader of the Permanent Group for Telecommunication 
Terminology (MOTO), Kostas Valeontis, as a dBASE III-Plus database, while in 1999 it was converted by 
him into an MS Access 97 database; today it is an MS Access 2000 database. 
The development, operation, maintenance and feeding of TELETERM is performed by the leader of MOTO 
himself, who has also the responsibility for the content in the website. 
Accessing and searching the Telecommunications termbase TELETERM is free on the Internet, in order to 
promote usage of modern Greek telecommunication terms by anybody concerned both inside the 
Telecommunications sector and in a wider area outside of it, given the intension and extension of the 
development of this sector within the framework of The Information Society. 
Free availability of the terms of TELETERM on the Internet was decided in 2002 by a trilateral Agreement of: 
 
the Hellenic Telecommunications Organization (OTE), as the founder and supporter of MOTO, within 
the work of which MOTO had produced 70.000 terms of the termbase, 
 
the Hellenic Society for Terminology (ELETO), as the formal higher organization for coordination and 
support of Greek terminology, one of the founding collective members of which is MOTO, and within 
the work of which MOTO had produced the rest 17.000 terms of the termbase, and of 
 
the chairman of MOTO, as the creator of the Termbase, holds the property rights and is responsible 
for its dynamic operation, maintenance and development. 
OTE covered the initial expenditure as well as the hosting of the termbase on the website www.moto-
teleterm.gr. Today, access and searching in the Termbase is performed via ELETO’s website www.eleto.gr, 
where the latest version of the Termbase has been uploaded. 
The field structure of the Termbase TELETERM comprises the following basic fields (which, in each entry, 
correspond to a single concept): 
BASIC FIELDS OF TELETERM  
EXAMPLES 
English term 
error-free second  
English abbreviation 
EFS  
Greek term 
ασφάλματο δευτερόλεπτο  
Greek abbreviation 
EFS  
French term 
seconde sans erreur 
French abbreviation 
SSE  
German term 
fehlerfreie Sekunde 
German abbreviation 
EFS  
Foreign language reference source 
IEC 50(704)  
Greek language reference source 
ΕΛΟΤ 1300.04  
Stage of processing 
3  
 
Today, the termbase TELETERM contains 129.625 terminological entries of telecommunications. 
2 
 
Note 1 
Since there is no national language policy for establishing rules of creation and application purely Greek 
acronyms and abbreviations, the English ones are generally used both in Information Technology and in 
Telecommunications. 
Note 2 
Terms being in stage of processing 3 are definitive. Those in stage 2 have been prepared by ΜΟΤΟ and the 
relevant source is in a Draft status for Public Enquiry. Stage 4 or greater indicates that the relevant term has 
been subjected to one or more revisions. 
 
 
