SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/ELETO-EAFT_Conference_2013-11-07/ELETO-EAFT-Symposium-2013_Joseph%20Mariani_CV_EN.pdf

EAFT–ELETO Symposium 
“National Languages and Terminology  
in Higher Education, Science & Technology” 
Athens, Greece, 7 November 2013 
 
Joseph Mariani 
 
Joseph Mariani is a Fellow researcher at CNRS. He was the director of LIMSI, a French CNRS 
laboratory, from 1989 to 2000, and head of its "Human-Machine Communication” department. He 
then became Director of the "Information and Communication Technologies" department at the 
French Ministry for Research from 2001 to 2006. Since 2007, he is the director of the Institute for 
Multilingual and Multimedia Information (IMMI), a joint International Laboratory involving 
LIMSI-CNRS in France, the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT) and the Technical University 
of Aachen (RWTH) in Germany, which is part of the Integrated Management Team of the Quaero 
program . 
He chaired the CNRS ICT Advisory Committee and was a member of the CNRS Engineering 
department Advisory Committee, Scientific Council and Ethics Committee (COMETS). He is now 
a member of the national Ethics committee for ICT (CERNA). Within his ministerial duties, he 
seated in the Board of Trustees of several French entities (ANFr , IGN, OST, INRIA,…). He was 
recently a member of the Board of the System@tic Competitiveness Cluster, and of the Scientific 
Committees of the Telecommunication Engineering Schools (Institut Télécom) and of the National 
Institute for Research on Safety (INRS).  
He served as convenor of the Coordinating Committee on Speech Databases and I/O Systems 
Assessment (Cocosda) and of the AUF Francophone Language Engineering Network (Francil), and 
as president of the European Speech Communication Association, now International Speech 
Communication Association (ISCA) and as president of the European Language Resources 
Association (ELRA).  
He participated in many EC projects, and recently in FLaReNet (the Fostering Language Resources 
Network) and in META-NET (the Multilingual Europe Technology Alliance Network of 
Excellence), where he seats in the Executive Board. 
An author of more than 600 publications and communications, he is in the Editorial Committees of 
the “Language Resources and Evaluation” and “Speech Technology” Journals, and of the “Text, 
speech and language” book series.  
