SOURCE: https://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/13th%20Conference/13thConference-PaperEditingInstructions-EN.pdf

ΕΛΕΤΟ 
ΕΛΛΗΝΙΚΗ ΕΤΑΙΡΕΙΑ ΟΡΟΛΟΓΙΑΣ 
HELLENIC SOCIETY FOR TERMINOLOGY 
 
13th Conference “Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
11–13 November 2021, Online 
Info: Tel. 6974321009, E-mail: valeonti@otenet.gr 
 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR EDITING AND PRESENTING THE PAPER 
 
A. Editing 
 
1 
The paper should be no more than 10 pages and no less than 8 pages long; it should be edited 
in .doc format (compatible with MS WORD97–2003), in one of the two languages (Greek or 
English) of the Conference and it should be sent by e-mail to valeonti@otenet.gr not later than 
31 July 2021. 
 
2 
The font to be used is ARIAL 11 for the paper title, ARIAL 10 for the chapter titles, ARIAL 8 for 
the abstracts και ARIAL 9 for the remaining text, with a spacing of 0 points before and a spacing 
of 6 points after each paragraph, while the line spacing will be 1,5. 
 
3 
The whole text will be typed in normal template. Footnotes can be used, but not endnotes. 
 
4 
Page setup will be as follows: 
 
Paper size: 
Α4 
Orientation: 
 Portrait 
 
Margins 
 
 
 
cm 
top 
 
2 
bottom 
 
8,5 
bottom 
 
2 
right 
 
6 
gutter 
 
0 
header 
 
1 
footer 
 
1 
 
5 
The first page should contain: 
 
a) the paper title in small letters (bold), centre aligned 
b) the name(s) of the author(s) in small letters (bold), centre aligned under the paper title, and 
separated by commas (no title or profession mentioned) 
c) the word ΠΕΡΙΛΗΨΗ/ABSTRACT in the language of the paper (Greek or English) 
d) the abstract text in the language of the paper (Greek or English) 
e) repetition of the above points a), b), c) and d) in the other official language of the 
Conference.  
 
6 
In case that the language of the paper and of the first abstract is English, and the author, or one 
of the authors, speaks Greek, the second abstract shall be in Greek, and approximately 2 
pages long; also, a short English-Greek glossary should be added at the end as an Annex, 
containing the basic special terms of the paper. In case of difficulties with the equivalent Greek 
terms needed, the author is encouraged to contact ELETO for help. 
(Note that neither the abstracts nor the glossary count in the 8-10 pages required for the paper.) 
E
Λ  
Ε  Τ Ο 
L 
E
 
2
 
7 
The paper body should begin four spaces after the end of the second abstract or from a new 
page (2nd page).  
 
Section or paragraph headings should be in small letters (bold) and in normal template (not 
formatted as headings). 
 
8 
Page numbering (temporary) should be placed at the right top of the header on each page. 
 
9 
Section or paragraph numbering should follow the decimal system (if there exists an introduction 
it is given the digit 0), with the respective headings being left aligned. 
 
10 
The transcription of Greek names (conversion of Greek characters to the Latin alphabet) should 
be conformant to the Greek Standard ELOT 743 (equivalent to the International Standard ISO 
843). 
 
11 
Bibliographic references should written according to the instructions in Annex. 
 
12 
At the end of the paper, the following information about the author(s) should be indicated: name 
and surname, title or profession, and postal address. 
 
13 
In case that the text contains special fonts (special characters, symbols etc.) it should be saved 
(through WORD) with fonts embedded, by selecting: Word Options – Save – Embed fonts in the 
file. 
 
14. 
As for the terminology to be used in the text of the paper, it is recommended to apply the 
International Standards on terminology (ISO 1087:2019, ISO 704:2009) and the equivalent 
national standards (ΕLOT 561-1:2006, ELOT 402:2010). The terminology used in those 
standards is contained in the glossary “General and special terms in the field of 
Terminology” (http://www.eleto.gr/download/Bodies/TE21-TerminologyTerms_GR.pdf), in the 
form of trilingual terminological entries in Greek, English and French. Useful content from 
ELOT 402:2010 has been publicized in ELETO’s Newsletter “Orogramma”, about the Principles 
of term formation, uploaded on: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Orogramma/Or102_V05.pdf, as 
well as concerning the Formation mechanisms of Greek terms, uploaded on: 
http://www.eleto.gr/download/Orogramma/Or103_V04.pdf. 
 
 
B. Presentation 
14 
The Conference may be supported by simultaneous translation between the languages English 
 Greek, if needed. 
15 
The presentation material of a paper (slides, tables, diagrams etc.) may be written in any of the 
two languages of the Conference, and in large size characters (PowerPoint No 24 and more) so 
they be easily read by the conferees. 
16 
In case that the language of the text of a paper is English, while the speaker, or one of the 
speakers, speaks Greek, his/her oral presentation should be in Greek (yet, no translation of the 
text or of the presentation material is required). 
 
C. Curriculum vitae 
17 
The paper should be accompanied by a short CV of each of the authors, in Greek and/or in 
English, not exceeding 200 words. 
 
 
3
ANNEX 
Bibliographic references and in-text citations 
 
The following general rules, according to Harvard system (the so-called Name and Date system), are 
applied  for the preparation of bibliographic references and corresponding in-text citations: 
 
 
The references to information resources cited in the text are arranged in a list in the alphabetical 
order of the creators' surnames, with the year of publication and lower-case letter, if any, 
immediately following the creator's name in parentheses· the separate listing of greek and other 
language references is preferred. 
 
The general order of elements in each bibliographic reference is: creator(s) name(s), year of 
publication, title (of book, article, paper etc), production information (place of publication and 
publisher), series title, if applicable (e.g. journal or conference title), numeration (volume, issue 
number), availability, access or location information and access date, if applicable, and any other 
additional information depending on the type of  information resources cited. 
 
Citations in text are written within parentheses and contain the creator’s surname and the 
publication year. If two or more resources are cited with the same creator name and the same 
publication year, then a lower-case letter (a, b, c etc) follows the publication year, exactly as in the 
corresponding reference. 
 
If creators are more than three, then only the first creator’s name is included in the citation, 
followed by κ.ά. /  et al. 
 
Examples 
Bibliographic references: 
Δημολιάτης, Ι., Γαλάνης, Π., Γελαστοπούλου, Ε., Ευαγγέλου, Β., Καντζανού, Μ., Λάγιου, Α., Νένα, Ε., 
Ντζάνη, E., Παναγιωτόπουλος, Τ., Ραχιώτης, Γ., Σμυρνάκης, Ε., Χάιδιτς, Ά. (2015). Λεξικό όρων 
υγιεινής και επιδημιολογίας. Αθήνα: Σύνδεσμος Ελληνικών Ακαδημαϊκών Βιβλιοθηκών. [πρόσβαση 24 
Μαρτίου 2019]. Διαθέσιμο από: https://repository.kallipos.gr/handle/11419/2667. 
Ιορδανίδου,  Α. και Μάντζαρη, Ε. (2005). Τα θηλυκά επαγγελματικά ουσιαστικά: γλωσσική χρήση και 
τυποποίηση. Στο: 5ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία», ΕΛΕΤΟ, Λευκωσία, 13-15 
Οκτωβρίου 
2005. 
[πρόσβαση 
24 
Μαρτίου 
2019]. 
Διαθέσιμο 
από: 
http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/5th%20Conference/5th_06-44-
Iordanidou_Mantzari%20Paper2.pdf. 
Χαραλαμπάκης, Χρ. (επιμ.) (2014).  Χρηστικό λεξικό της νεοελληνικής γλώσσας. Αθήνα: Ακαδημία 
Αθηνών. 
Christakis, N.A. and Fowler, J.H. (2009). Connected: the surprising power of our social networks and 
how they shape our lives. New York: Little, Brown.  
Kyriacopoulou, T., Mrabti, S. and Yannacopoulou, A. (2002) Le dictionnaire électronique des noms 
composés en grec modern. Lingvisticæ Investigationes,  25(1), pp. 7-28. 
 
Corresponding in-text citations: 
(Δημολιάτης κ.ά., 2015) 
(Ιορδανίδου και Μάντζαρη, 2005) 
(Χαραλαμπάκης, 2014) 
(Christakis and Fowler, 2009) 
(Kyriacopoulou, Mrabti and Yannacopoulou, 2002) 
 
 
 
4
Προβλήματα πρόσληψης της ορολογίας και θεωρίας στη μέση 
εκπαίδευση 
    
Καλλιόπη Πολυμέρου 
ΠΕΡΙΛΗΨΗ 
Η περίοδος της λυκειακής εκπαίδευσης είναι η κατάλληλη εποχή για να εισαχθούν οι μαθητές σε 
ζητήματα θεωρίας και ορολογίας. Η εμπειρική διαπίστωση ότι οι μαθητές δυσκολεύονται να 
χρησιμοποιούν και να αποκωδικοποιούν λόγο που περιέχει ορολογία φαίνεται να συνδέεται με 
ζητήματα γλωσσικά και συγκεκριμένα με τον τρόπο με τον οποίο εφαρμόζεται η γλωσσική διδασκαλία 
στην μέση ιδιαίτερα εκπαίδευση. Τα ζητήματα της γλώσσας και της διδασκαλίας της στη χώρα μας  
αποτέλεσαν συχνά θέματα επιστημονικών αλλά και λαϊκών συζητήσεων και αντεγκλήσεων με μόνιμο 
ζητούμενο το κατά πόσον αυτή η πλούσια πολιτιστική κληρονομιά θα μας βοηθήσει να κερδίσουμε ένα 
πλούσιο γλωσσικό όργανο. Παράλληλα, η εισβολή της εικόνας και η ραγδαία ανάπτυξη της 
εισαγόμενης τεχνολογίας έχουν περιαγάγει την ορολογία σε δυνάστη, με αποτέλεσμα όλο και 
περισσότεροι να συμβιβάζονται με αμετάφραστους και αγοραίους όρους.  
Problems of understanding terminology and theory in secondary 
education 
    
Kalliopi Polymerou 
ABSTRACT 
The period of upper secondary education is the right time to introduce students to issues of theory and 
terminology. The empirical conclusion that students find it difficult to use and decode speech that 
contains terminology, seems to be connected with language matters and specifically with the way 
language teaching is applied in secondary education. The issues of language and language teaching in 
our country were often matters of both scientific and popular debates and recriminations in a permanent 
challenge whether this rich cultural heritage will help us gain a rich language. At the same time the 
invasion of picture and the rapid growth of imported technology have made terminology seem like an 
oppressor. The result is more and more students being content with untranslated terms as well as  
terms imposed by the market.    
 
 
 
 
0. Εισαγωγή 
Η παρούσα εργασία είναι προϊόν διδακτικής εμπειρίας, ιδιαίτερα από τον χώρο της 
δημόσιας μέσης εκπαίδευσης, η οποία άλλωστε και αποτελεί κατά την άποψή μου για 
διάφορους λόγους το ‘κομβικότερο’ σημείο του εκπαιδευτικού μας συστήματος, και ιδιαίτερα 
An example of 1st page  
