SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/ELETO-EAFT_Conference_2013-11-07/ELETO-EAFT_Symposium-2013_Programme_EN.pdf

 
E 
Λ  
 Ε  Τ  Ο 
L 
E 
 
 
 
European Civil Society embraces Multilingualism 
 
Symposium 
 
National Languages and Terminology 
in 
Higher Education, Science & Technology 
 
Symposium organisation 
Symposium organized in Athens, Greece, on 7 November 2013 by the Hellenic Society for 
Terminology ELETO, the National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, the University of 
Cyprus and the European Association for Terminology EAFT. 
The Symposium is organised in conjunction with the 9th Conference “Hellenic Language and 
Terminology” from 7-9 November. 
All information about the Symposium can be found in this document in chapters under the 
following headings: 
Introduction 
National languages in HE, the silent revolution 
Exploring European HE, raising European awareness 
Venue 
Languages 
International Programme Committee 
Greek Organising Committee 
Programme 
Registration 
 
National languages in Higher Education, the silent revolution  
In 2008 the EAFT member for the Netherlands and Flanders, NL-Term, organised a conference 
in Brussels to investigate the advance of English-taught higher education in Dutch-speaking 
Europei. There was an urgent need to address this theme: in 2008, an estimated 80% of the 
master courses in universities in the Netherlands were English-taught. Three decades before, this 
percentage was zero. All lessons, with a few individual exceptions, were in Dutch. In Flanders 
the number of English-taught lessons was much smaller, but on the rise. 
Questions. What had happened? Who decided this? Had there been an appropriate democratic 
consultation? Were the teaching staff prepared for this major, yes, dramatic change of academic 
2 
 
culture?  What about the quality of knowledge transfer? If the population found out that their 
children were not allowed any more to study in their own mother tongue, how they would react; 
after all, universities and other schools are largely paid by the citizen, the tax-payer. And what if 
the next waves of graduates, largely trained in English, enters the Dutch labour market, to 
become school teacher, lawyer, medical doctor, civil servant, engineer, journalist, marketer, 
manager, and so on, all functions for which an academic title is supposed to be required? Did 
anybody think about the social and cultural consequences? And did the university governors 
think about the effects on the long term, did they want to fundamentally change the culture and 
the identity of the country? What would be the consequences for the European cooperation, 
which is fundamentally based upon the cultural and linguistic diversity of its’ constituent 
peoples and countries?  
Some answers. This phenomenon and its implications for the future of the language, for the 
civil society and its cultural, social and democratic future in Europe and the world had been 
studied in anticipation of this important cultural revolution. A democratic consultation of the 
citizens had not taken place, the citizens were, and still are not informed about the transition. 
The politicians were not properly informed either, let even consulted; it wasn’t necessary 
because the universities were allowed to autonomously decide about such matters supposed to 
be ‘internal’ matters. 
One early study about the impact on knowledge transfer under such a radically changed 
language regime predicted an important loss of quality and effectiveness, but there was no 
interest for ‘negative’ signals.  
Exploring European Higher Education, raising European awareness 
After the Brussels conference in 2088, the EAFT and other European and national stakeholders 
decided to ‘move’ the concept to other countries in Europe.  
Ljubljana 2010 (Slovenia) was the second in line with the conference National Languages in 
Higher Education, jointly organised with the Slovenian Academy of Sciencesii. After the 
conference, a Slovenian Declaration about the Slovene language in Higher Education was 
drafted. 
Tallinn 2011 (Estonia)iii was conceived in Estonia, The title of the international conference, 
organised by Tallinn University and supported by the Estonian Ministry of Education and 
Research: Konverents Rahvuskeeled teaduses ja kõrghariduses/International conference on 
National Languages in Academic Research and Higher Education (NatAcLang) 
Athens 2013 (Greece) will add another national conference with international participation to 
the list. The event will be dedicated to exploring the situation, raising awareness and mobilising 
the civil society in the Greek setting, drawing conclusions for Greece and the rest of Europe.  
Venue 
University of Athens, Kostis Palamas Building, Athens, Greece. 
Languages 
English and Greek (simultaneous translation). 
 
3 
 
Programme Advisory Committee  
Jan Roukens, co-chairman (BE) 
Panagiotis G. Krimpas, co-chairman (EL) 
Jordi Bover i Salvadó (ES Catalunya) 
Anna-Lena Bucher (SE) 
Gerhard Stickel (DE) 
Kostas Valeontis (EL) 
Marjeta Humar (Sl) 
Bénédicte Madinier (FR) 
Peep Nemvalts (EE) 
Delyth Prys (UK Wales) 
Marita Kristiansen (NO) 
Jolanta Zabarskaitė (LT) 
Ágota Fóris (HU) 
 
Greek Organising Committee 
Panagiotis G. Krimpas 
Anna Anastasiadis-Symeonidis 
Marilena Karyolemou 
Marianna Katsoyannou 
Panagiotis Kontos 
Anna Lambrou-Gonou 
Amalia Moser 
Katerina Toraki 
Georgios Tsiamas 
Kostas Valeontis  
 
Programme 
08:30  Registration of participants 
09:30  Theodosios Pelegrinis, rector of Athens university,  
 
Kostas Valeontis, president of ELETO,  
 
Opening of the international symposium, preceding the 9th Hellenic Language & 
Terminology conference 
09:45 
Androulla Vassiliou, European Commissioner for Education, Culture, Multilingualism 
and Youth 
 
Video message to the participants of the symposium 
09:50  Jan Hoel, president of the EAFT 
 
Languages and Terminology in a multilingual world 
10:00  Anna Anastasiadou-Symeonidou 
 
Greek as a scientific language since 3000 years 
10:30  Joseph Mariani 
 
ICT enabling Language Diversity 
10:45  Coffee break 
4 
 
11:15  Panagiotis Krimpas (Greece, chairman) 
 
Jan Roukens (Europe, the Netherlands), Marjeta Humar (Slovenia),  
 
Jordi Bover i Salvadó (Spain, Catalonia), Peep Nemvalts (Estonia),  
 
Delyth Prys (United Kingdom, Wales), Anna-Lena Bucher (Sweden),  
  
Marita Kristiansen (Norway),  Marilena Karyolemou (Cyprus) 
 
State-of-affairs: the use of the national languages in European universities, short 
interventions 
13:15  Lunch 
14:30  Pascalina Grigoriadou 
 
Multilingualism policy and actions of the European Commission 
14:50  Amalia Moser 
 
A cultural code of conduct for European academics  
15:10  Coffee break 
15:40  Jan Roukens & Panagiotis Krimpas, co-Chairmen 
 
Panel members as in the State of Affairs panel 
 
Final Round Table, discussing the main issues raised during the day, with the aim to 
come to conclusions and recommendations with respect to the Greece, Cyprus and 
Europe. To explore whether a Declaration in support of Academic Language Diversity 
in Europe is feasible. 
17:40  Closing the ELETO/EAFT symposium 
19:00  Opening Session of the 9th Conference “Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
 
Registration 
Registration is free of charge; however, all registrations should be submitted by completing the 
registration form and sending it to ELETO: 
Webpage: http://www.eleto.gr/en/ELETO‐EAFT_Conference_2013‐11‐07.html 
 
 
The Symposium is supported by: 
the Hellenic Society for Terminology ELETO 
the European Association for Terminology EAFT-AET 
the Délégation génerale à la langue française et aux langues de France DGLFLF 
the stichting Nederlands SN 
 
 
 
                                                           
i   
Nederlands in hoger onderwijs & wetenschap?, proceedings (in Dutch). Editors: Albert Oosterhof e.a. 
Publisher: Academia Press, Gent, 2008. ISBN 978 90 382 1539 6 
ii   
National Languages in Higher Education/Nacionalni jeziki v visokem šolstvu, proceedings (in 
Slovene/English). Editors: Marjeta Humar a.o. Publisher: ZRC Publishing, Scientific Research Centre SASA, 
Ljubljana, 2010. 
iii   
Programme and proceedings Estonian conference 2011 : 
http://www.tlu.ee/files/arts/10106/NatAcb15e4a384567c8341326324c185de828.pdf  
