SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/12th%20Conference/Papers-and-speakers/12th_27-06-29_KarosanidzeLia_Paper1_V03.pdf

ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
370 
27    The terminology work in Georgia 
  
Lia Karosanidze 
 
Abstract 
It should be noted that, unfortunately, in the recent period the Georgian terminology suffers from the 
amateurish, layman approaches and lack of the standardized stated terminology created on the 
academic level. On the one side the flow of the foreign words rushed into the language and replaced 
Georgian terminology and, besides that, in order to express one meaning, one notion, we have some 
variations which often are absolutely different. Of course such a process has bad influence on the 
language preservation and development. 
Despite the chaos that exists, the terminological department of the Georgian Institute of Linguistics have 
managed to continue the scientific traditions and go on to the new stage of the terminological work.  
The tradition of terminological work in Georgia has a long history and I hope that the nation which 
started the process of term creation soon after the spread of Christianity (in the 5
th -6
th centuries) will 
overcome the modern difficulties, too.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
It is well known that creation of terminology is one of the hard problems related to this 
branch of linguistics but its implementation for common use is the second and the most 
important one.    
We suppose that there are two main things to know in this context: 
1.  Historical experience in this branch of linguistics we have in our country; 
2.  Modern European experience.  
Regarding the history of Georgian terminology we can easily notice that two directions have 
always been existing in the terminology work in Georgia, in particular-private and common 
terminology work; in other words, the terminology work in Georgia as well as in other 
countries used to be historically either uncontrolled or controlled.  
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
371 
There are essential differences between these two kinds of developments. the former or 
uncontrolled type of terminology work has become now the part of historical heritage; as 
for controlled or public terminology work, it is the basement for the language development. 
The public terminology work as it can be seen through the historical development is directly 
related to the state-level thinking; only this kind of terminology work can influence the 
language development causing important changes. Conducting the right terminology work 
needs only state-level solutions (Karosanidze, Khurtsilava 2018).   
As early as Georgia adopted Christianity the need in scientific terminology became evident 
and consequently, the Georgian terminological school began to take off. As far back as in 
the VI century, the work aiming to create special terminology in religion, philosophy, 
grammar started in Georgia. The translations of literary works in Georgian preserved large 
and important material from the terminological viewpoint (Melikishvili 1999; Karosanidze 
2017).  
The Georgian language and Georgian terminology underwent long centuries and many 
difficulties sometimes reaching progress and sometimes losing its linguistic peculiarities 
while interacting among other languages. The historical development of the Georgian 
terminology work clearly justifies the thesis that a language is successfully developing only if 
it succeeds in developing of its own terminology in different branches.  
As about the Georgian terminology in the Soviet period (1921-1990), according the Soviet 
standards terminology was controlled and coordinated. One scientific research institute was 
leading institute of the terminology work in Georgia and this excluded the diversities in 
Georgian terminology. The terminology scientific workers were working hard trying not to 
make calques without translation, but translate the terms into Georgian or create new terms 
from the Georgian word roots. It is very important that they succeeded in continuing and 
further developing the traditions of the Georgian terminological school.  
The terminological dictionaries of several branches of science and technology are compiled 
at the Georgian Institute of Linguistics. Unfortunately, during the recent years the functioning 
of the Institute has got less productive, though no other scientific organization has taken its 
place in this sphere yet. It is no surprise that none of the groups of specialists or even large 
organizations were able to do this serious and hard work separately. Loss of coordination 
resulted in the fact that we still do not have a full list of the several terminological dictionaries 
having been compiled during some recent years. It is no surprise that there can be some 
quite serious and valuable dictionaries among the recently compiled but we have no 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
372 
information about it, no serious scientifically based reviews are written about terminological 
dictionaries. For this reason, the development of the Georgian scientific terminology is 
obviously slowed and weakened; terminological control established during the Soviet years 
still was a good tool for standard creating is lost. In some recent year’s project financing 
became preferable which seriously damaged the abilities of the scientific terminological work 
in our country as great number of the projects are fulfilling without coordination between 
several groups which often work simultaneously on the terminology of the same branch 
without any coordination. The results of such kind of work are obvious; for example, several 
banks functioning in Georgia compile dictionaries of the bank and financial terminology 
simultaneously without consulting and coordinating with each other; thus, in fact, every bank 
has its own terminology and the terms differ even in the handbooks. The terms are not 
standardized; thus any author can choose a term by own free choice (Georgian Term Bank 
2018).  
He we can only add that while studying European experience we were convinced that in 
many European countries terminology is on the nationwide level thus it gets direct 
governmental funding. Terminology work cannot be fruitful only with project funding.  
Taking the modern days situation into consideration, in 2013, the terminology Department of 
the Georgian Institute of Linguistics initiated to institute a special conference in order to unite 
the scientific society working in the terminology field; this conference should be dedicated to 
reestablish proper control on the terminology work in Georgia. It has been already six years 
now with representatives of many branches of science and technology. 
We founded the journal “Terminological Issues”, with a scientific and editorial boards; the 
material published in the journal is supplied with summaries in English and with searching 
indexes of terms and persons.   
The Vucol Beridze Terminological Society was founded and it is a member of the European 
Terminological Society from 2017; about 50 members are united in this society; we set up a 
special internet page and are going on with establishing farther ties with the terminology 
workers of the European countries.   
Last year we held the the first international conference on terminology. The main goal was to 
share the European countries’ experience in the sphere of terminology and to present our 
own achievements and the problems that exist.    
The main achievement of one of the oldest Scientific Terminological Department of the 
Georgian Institute of Linguistics is that the Georgian Term Bank exists.   
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
373 
It is known that the process of creating the Term Banks began in Europe in the 80-ies of the 
last century. The main goal of the banks was to gather all the printed terminological 
dictionaries, study them thoroughly and create national multi-branch national terminological 
fund which could serve as the base for all kinds of the normative dictionaries in the future. 
Finally, the national term bank would join to the international terminological bases and this 
process promotes free using of the normative terminological dictionaries of any language on 
the international level.    
Many countries have already had their Term Banks, such as: France, Sweden, Romania, 
Ireland, Greece, Slovakia, Croatia, Estonia and others. The national terminological material 
can be placed into the international terminological bases only after the national normative 
correspondences are identified. Unfortunately, having rich traditions of terminology work and 
several terminological dictionaries published, we lack a Term Bank; thus we can not put our 
terminological material into the international Terms Banks for the time being; though it 
should be said that some groups are voluntarily trying to place the Georgian terms  through 
the internet. Naturally such separate voluntary and unauthorized actions cannot bring 
desirable results. The results will be undesirable. This will cause only transition of the 
diversifications exiting in Georgian terminology into the international terminological bases.  
The long time work on the bilingual translation dictionaries carried out by the scientific 
workers of the Terminological Department of the Georgian Institute of Linguistics has given 
its results. The terms of the several branches of science were settled and the reliable 
terminological system developed which originated the idea of the multi-branch term bank. 
Now the term bank contains 112 800 terms from the several branches. These terms are 
systematically updated and fulfilled. Georgian Arn. Chikobava Institute of Linguistics (TSU), 
the Library of the Georgian Parliament and Vukol Beridze Terminological Association of 
Georgia are participating in the project.   
Sharing the experience of the European countries allows us to develop the Georgian Term 
Bank in a proper way so that it would be useful for creating the normative terminological 
dictionaries for the different branches.      
What are the principles for developing the existing Georgian terminology and how it can 
serve as the base for compiling the modern terminological dictionaries or for refreshing and 
re-editing already existed ones.  
 
 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
374 
The program design for the Georgian Term Bank looks as follows with its functions:  
a)  Searched word field;  
b)  Synonymy field;   
c)  Word explanation;  
d)  Word composition;  
e)  Word origin;  
f)  Derivatives; 
g)  Field of barbarisms; 
h)  Word stem/root field;   
I)  Field of the branch the word belongs to;  
j)  Field for the specialists’ notes; 
k)  Unpublished terminological materials;   
l)  History of the given word’s origin;  
m)  Non-literary (colloquial) lexis field;   
n)  The related material field from Old Georgian; 
The material is processed in accordance with the above listed items.    
Synonymy is one of the problems when conducting the editorial work on the technical 
terminology.  This phenomenon took place because of the epoch peculiarities which left the 
heritage where all terms are represented in two variants denoting one notion: one Georgian 
term and the other- foreign. But today, through studying and considering the history of 
terminology, we should make decision which one to choose. Synonymy should be overcome 
but how to do it? Which term should be maintained – Georgian or foreign? Deviation – 
deviacia (eng.) or gadaxra (geo)? dehidratation - dehidratacia or gauwyloeba? 
Dinamometer -  dinamometri or Zalsazomi? As for the term gas, it seems that both terms 
now existing in Georgian: gazi –airi are equally settled and used in the language. May be 
the new editorial group can represent new idea about it. 
We know that proper interpreting of the notion is highly important. Working on the 
explanatory dictionary of the technical terms is very hard work. It turned out that one and the 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
375 
same term has different definitions in different manuals or scientific papers. We suppose 
that it will produce difficulties for the group of scientists who work on the terminological 
dictionaries as they mainly follow the explanations of the terms given in the scientific 
literature. Defining the terminology is based just on the precise definition. Correspondingly, 
the normative terminology based on the data of dictionaries and scientific literature, with the 
proper definitions, should be reflected in our terminological bases (Karosanidze, Khurtsilava 
2018). 
One of the most important moments is also selecting the proper derivative tools when 
analyzing all the forms of the terms and in order to pass to the next stage (the next stage 
implies delivering the gathered data to the specialists for redaction work and then discussing 
the redaction results with them). We decided it was necessary to create the base for each 
terminological dictionary. As we have already mentioned, while working on any problem, we 
discuss the examples of every existing terminological dictionary in Georgian;  
There always were different approaches to terms derivation in the different periods of the 
Georgian terminology creating work. Processing the material enables us to sort out all the 
derivative tools and study a certain branch of terms from this viewpoint; for example, we 
study the derivation tools used in economic, medical or general technical terminology: 
The words can be also distinguished by their composition; for example, we can find simple 
or complex terms in the data, in Georgian or in English. 
The history of some terms is worth of special attention too. The histories of some words 
already have emerged in the Georgian terms bank, e, g. mathematical term gantoleba 
(gantoleba-equation) – this term was introduced by Niko Muskhelishvili. First he chooses 
the word gatoleba but later, following the advice of Giorgi Akhvlediani, he restored the Old 
Georgian preverb ga-gan (R. Ghambashidze, 1985:129, in the note) – so, we can see that 
the history of a word can be denoted in its source and we can find it in the bibliography. The 
term asanTi (asanTi -matches) created by Alexandre Jafaridze (R. Ghambashidze, 
1985:139); quro – (quro – furnace) created by R. Eristavi (Iordanishvili, 2013:151). 
From the viewpoint of history, it is very important to show the data of the old researches, the 
records of conferences or disputes, memoirs, any papers reflecting the discussions on the 
concrete terms (Karosanidze, Khurtsilava 2018). 
Studying and analyzing the branch terminologies in the mentioned way will allow us to:  
1. Create full electronic base of the Georgian terms;  
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
376 
2. Gather all known or still unknown material relating to term creation and 
implementation; create history of Georgian terminology work and base the 
modern normative terminology on this base (Georgian Term Bank 2018).  
We plan to make the Georgian termbank publicly available in this autumn. Its main 
destination will be:   
1. To support the users of the dictionary with precise correspondences of the terms 
of any branch of science, in different languages;   
2. From the scientific point of view – users can find: 
a) Material by its composition, derivation or origin;  
b) Historical correspondences of the normative terms;  
c) Definition;  
d) Material according the thematic groups. 
3. From the cognitive point of view: the interested person can find out the name of 
the term’s author, history of the term’s creation, its Old Georgian or dialect 
correspondences.  
We think that inability as well as ability of the educated society is best seen through the 
process of developing terminology in their native language. We can easily estimate the 
society looking through the terminology development on the different historical stages. 
Surely, some years later, the level of our modern Georgian society development will be 
accessed by the final result of the terminology work – how our scientific society managed to 
deal with the new challenges of the terminology work; the new generation will answer the 
question – did we create and enrich the Georgian terminology or did we lose this challenge 
due to our incapability.   
As the history of the Georgian terminological work shows, to conduct proper terminological 
research is impossible without collective and coordinated work. Holding the terminological 
conferences, discussing the problems together, with participation of the linguists and other 
specialists are the absolute preconditions to achieve desirable results. Only coordinated 
work of all the specialists, in cooperation with the newly established State Language 
Department, only foundation of the terminological data banks, renewing the terminological 
fund of the branches of science and technologies can give the results enabling to overcome 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
 
377 
the difficulties and create Georgian terminology which can obtain its due position in the 
modern scientific world. 
Bibliographic references 
Georgian Term Bank 2018 – Lia Karosanidze, Irakli Ujmajuridze, Emzar Jgerenaia, 
Georgian Term Bank (Electronic Resources for Terminology Corpus), Terminological 
Issues’, III, Tbilisi. 
Karosanidze, 2012 – Lia Karosanidze, the Problems of Georgian Terminology (History and 
Modernity), Kartvelology, 6, Tbilisi. 
Karosanidze 2017 – Lia Karosanidze, Antique-Byzantine Theories about Language and 
Georgian Grammar Thought, Tbilisi. 
Karosanidze, Khurtsilava 2018 – Lia Karosanidze, Ana Khurtsilava, the Problems of 
Georgian Terminology /History and Modernity/ Tbilisi.  
Melikishvili 1975 – Damana Melikishvili, the Language and Style of Philosophical Works of 
Joanè Petritsi, Tbilisi.  
Melikishvili 1986 – Damana Melikishvili, Gelati School and the Issues of Development of 
Georgian Scientific Language, Proceedings of Iv. Javakhishvili Tbilisi State University, 
Linguistics, N 10, Tbilisi.  
Melikishvili 1988 – Damana Melikishvili, Literature School of Gelati and the Ways of 
Development of Georgian Philosophical Language, Tbilisi.  
 
 
 
 
Lia Karosanidze 
Head of Department of Scientist Terminology and Bilingual Dictionaries at TSU Arn. Chikobava Institute 
of Linguistics 
Head of the Vukol Beridze Association for Terminology of Georgia 
E-mail: l.karosanidze@gmail.com 
 
 
