SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/6th%20Conference/6thHeLaTerm-2007_Call-for-Papers_EN.pdf

E
Λ  
Ε  Τ Ο
L 
E
ELETO 
ΕΛΛΗΝΙΚΗ ΕΤΑΙΡΕΙΑ ΟΡΟΛΟΓΙΑΣ 
HELLENIC SOCIETY FOR TERMINOLOGY 
SOCIÉTÉ HELLÉNIQUE DE TERMINOLOGIE 
 
 
 
6th Conference  
“Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
1-3 November 2007, Athens, GREECE 
Call for papers 
The Hellenic Society for Terminology (ELETO) in cooperation with the University of Cyprus, the University of 
Athens (UOA), the Aristotelian University of Thessaloniki (AUTH), the University of Patras, the National 
Technical University of Athens (NTUA), the French Institute of Athens (IFA), the Technical Chamber of 
Greece (TCG), the Institute for Language and Speech Processing (ILSP), and the Organization for the 
Internationalization of the Hellenic language organize the 6th Conference “Hellenic Language and 
Terminology”. The conference will be held in Athens, Greece, on 1-3 November 2007. 
The 6th Conference is dedicated to Vasilis A. Filopoulos, president of ELETO and chairman of the 
organizing committees of all five former conferences, who recently passed away. 
The aim of the Conference is to present the situation of the Hellenic language and terminology under current 
national and international conditions, from the viewpoint of both terminological research and applications, 
and to coordinate the terminological work in Greece and Cyprus. 
Themes of the Conference: 
1. 
Diachronic aspects of terminology 
2. 
Linguistic-ontological principles of terminology (terminology and knowledge, designating principles and methods, 
etc.) 
3. 
Didactics and terminology 
4. 
Terminology in specific subject fields – Lexicographical and terminographical studies 
5. 
Terminological resources (special and multilingual dictionaries, term selections, special corpora) 
6. 
Standardization of terminology (internationalization of concepts, and interlingual standardization and equivalence of 
terms, terminology proposals) 
7. 
New technologies and terminology 
8. 
Terminology and translation 
9. 
Activities of organizations and bodies for terminology 
Official languages of the Conference will be Greek, English and French 
Critical dates: 
Submission of abstracts by  
5 March 2007 
Approval of abstracts by  
5 April 2007 
Submission of full papers by  
15 June 2007 
Abstracts and papers: 
Participants wishing to present a paper at the Conference are invited to submit an abstract. The abstract 
should be written in one of the official languages of the Conference and should neither be less than 120 
words nor exceed 200 words. The following items must appear on the page of the abstract: 
a) 
title, place and dates of the Conference: 6th Conference “Hellenic Language and Terminology”, Athens, Greece, 
1-3 November 2007 
b) 
title of the paper 
c) 
name, profession, full address, tel. no / fax no and e-mail address of the author(s) and 
d) 
which of the themes above the paper comes under. 
The abstract should be drafted in electronic form (MS WORD doc format) and sent by e-mail, as an 
attached file, to: valeonti@otenet.gr.  
Following the examination of the abstracts by the Scientific Committee of the Conference, the authors of the 
selected papers will receive the necessary information for the preparation of the full texts of their papers. 
 
Information: 
Conference Secretariat: tel. +30 210 9323243, +30 6977529164, e-mail: pinelpap@hol.gr 
Organizing Committee: tel. +30 6974321009, e-mail: valeonti@otenet.gr 
Website: http://www.eleto.gr/en/Conference06.htm 
