SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/TermBases/TE48-OE1_History_EN.pdf

 Ο 
Ε  Λ  Ο   Τ    Ε 48 
  1 
 
ELOT/TC48/WG1: 
Working Group of ELOT/TC48, 
Collective Member of ELETO  
 
Chairman: K. Valeontis, valeonti@otenet.gr 
E 
Λ  
Ε  Τ  Ο 
L 
E 
 
February 2024 
 
ELOT/TC48/WG1 "Information Technology Terminology" 
1 
Establishment and operation of ELOT/TC48/WG1 
ELOT/TC48/WG1 is the Working Group No 1 of the Standardization Technical Committee ELOT/TC48 
“Electronic Data Processing”. 
Both the Committee and the Group had operated from 1986 to 1996, under the responsibility and support of the 
Greek Productivity Centre (ELKEPA) Computer Science Institute, while since 1996 they operate under the 
Standardization Department of Hellenic Organization for Standardization (ELOT). In the framework of this 
operation the Group has produced about 5.000 Greek information technology terms, together with their 
definitions in Greek, contained in 32 Hellenic Standards ELOT 996 series of standards). These terms are 
contained in the Information Technology TermBase INFORTERM. 
ELOT/TC48/WG1 closely cooperates with the Permanent Group for Telecommunications Terminology (MOTO), 
being one of the first groups that responded to MOTO's initiative and signed the Agreement for Mutual 
Recognition of Work, aiming at the inter-committee (inter-field) harmonization of Greek terms. 
ELOT/TC48/WG1 is one of the founding Collective Members of the Hellenic Society for Terminology (ELETO) 
and, in this capacity, it has produced about 2.000 Greek IT terms for the Termbank IATE (former Eurodicautom) 
of the European Union, all of which are also included in the Termbase INFORTERM. At the ELETO's General 
Scientific Board (GESY), the Group is represented by its chairman K. Valeontis  and as deputy representative by 
D. Panagiotakos. 
2 
Membership of ELOT/TC48/WG1 
Currently active members: 
 
Kostas Valeontis, physicist, electronic-telecom engineer, former head of the Division for 
Standardization of the Hellenic Telecommunications Organization (OTE), Chairman of the Group, 
 
Dimitris Panagiotakos, mathematician, computer analyst, 
 
Kostas Riziotis, physicist, electronic-telecom engineer (OTE), 
 
Pratikakis Ioannis, electrical engineer Democritus University of Thrace, Professor, Department of 
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Democritus University of Thrace, 
 
Tsiamas George, mechanical-electrical engineer, telecom engineer (OTE), 
 
Nikos Valeontis, physicist, computer engineer (Observer). 
Former members of the Group and their posts when they were members 
 
Dimitris Bakolas, computer scientist, Head of the ELKEPA Computer Science Institute, formerly 
chairman of the Group, 
 
Roula Anagnostopoulou, Head of ELKEPA's Standardization Activities, 
 
Spyros Diamesis, electrical engineer National Technical University of Athens (NTUA), counsellor of the 
Pedagogical Institute, 
2 
 
John Cavouras, physicist, computer scientist, professor at the Athens University of Economics and 
Business (AUEB), 
 
John Maistros , physicist, professor at NTUA, 
 
Paris Michalas, computer scientist, 
 
Chara Balta, computer analyst-programmer, head of the Division for Computer Facilities of the Athens 
Stock Exchange. 
 
Michael Bekakos, professor of Computer Systems at Democritus University of Thrace, HMMY 
Department, 
 
George Stouraitis, mathematician, journalist, 
3 
Products of ELOT/TC48/WG1 
The products of ELOT/TC48/WG1 can be divided into ordinary programme products and extraordinary 
programme products (see figure 1). The former comprise publications with IT terms and definitions (ELOT 996 
series of standards equivalent to ISO/IEC 2382 series) and vocabularies of IT terms, while the latter comprise a 
Trilingual Dictionary of Informatics (published by ELKEPA) and term collections for the EU termbank 
Eurodicautom (today: IATE) under ELETO. All terms produced have been imported into the termbase 
INFORTERM. 
3 
 
Figure 1 – Products of ELOT/TC48/WG1 
 
ELOT/TC48/WG1, during its long lasting operation, 
1. processed the IT terms of 32 Hellenic Standards of IT terminology (ELOT 996 series), equivalent to 
corresponding International Standards of ISO/IEC 2382 series, 
2. had 6 editions of the Consolidated Vocabulary of IT terms (its last edition 1999 contained: 6.959 
terminological entries) printed and disseminated by its chairman, 
3. prepared the content of the book Trilingual Terminology of Informatics (bublished by ELKEPA, 1991), 
4. as a collective member of ELETO, prepared the Greek equivalent terms of two term collections of the EU 
termbank Eurodicautom (today IATE), 
5. since 2001, instead of printed editions, has been offering on the Internet the termbase INFORTERM (today 
containing: 7.135 terminological entries), whose access is free via ELETO’s website. 
4 
 
