SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/12th%20Conference/Papers-and-speakers/12th_06-27-26_KaterinakisTh-ChnarakiM_Paper1_V04.pdf

ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
110 
6    Modern greek language learning challenges in the US:  
Instruction tools via terminological STEPS 
  
Theodoros Katerinakis, Maria Chnaraki 
ABSTRACT1 
Language learning in the US is already facing a decline in the broader concentration of general humanities. 
The modern Greek language teaching and learning in higher education in the US is, consequently, 
challenged by utility as well as administration factors. Drexel’s Greek Studies embraced Hellenism from 
antiquity to today, in an interdisciplinary manner, concentrating on Mediterranean issues, in order to face 
challenges of language instruction in the USA. Students from various majors, look for an answer to the 
question “why Greek/Greece in the 21st century”. Greek Studies electives cover disciplines like language, 
communication, international area studies, entrepreneurship and business, history and politics, music and 
anthropology. Classes negotiated the Greek “healthy” lifestyle, values and idea(l)s, creative forms of 
socialization, eating manners, folk practices and performances, business ventures and nissology. Didactics 
emphasize how those aspects of Greek reality advocate for community, sense of “belonging”, feelings of 
connection and security, as well as resilience in an era of crises. This approach in Greek language teaching 
connects language with multiple utilities connected with skills of different majors. 
The current paper is aimed to showcase development of materials and facets of authenticity, as well as 
project-based learning using language as a professional qualification/asset. In language instruction, 
“authentic language” facilitates the “simultaneous, seamless acquisition” of second language/culture with 
real-world context for learning and distributed practice, with immersion dimensions. 
Προκλήσεις της εκμάθησης της Ελληνικής Γλώσσας στις ΗΠΑ: Εργαλεία 
διδασκαλίας μέσω Ορολογικών Βημάτων (E.T.O.Π.K.) 
Theodoros Katerinakis, Maria Chnaraki 
ΠΕΡΙΛΗΨΗ 
Η εκμάθηση γλωσσών στις ΗΠΑ αντιμετωπίζει ήδη μια ύφεση στο ευρύτερο πεδίο των γενικών 
ανθρωπιστικών επιστημών. Η σύγχρονη διδασκαλία και εκμάθηση της ελληνικής γλώσσας στην τριτοβάθμια 
εκπαίδευση στις ΗΠΑ, κατά συνέπεια, αμφισβητείται από παράγοντες χρησιμότητας και διαχείρισης. Οι 
Ελληνικές Σπουδές του Drexel αγκάλιασαν τον Ελληνισμό από την αρχαιότητα μέχρι σήμερα, με 
διεπιστημονικό τρόπο, επικεντρώνοντας στα μεσογειακά ζητήματα, προκειμένου να αντιμετωπίσουν τις 
προκλήσεις της διδασκαλίας γλωσσών στις ΗΠΑ. Φοιτητές από διάφορες μεγάλες εταιρείες αναζητούν μια 
απάντηση στην ερώτηση «γιατί τα Ελληνικά / η Ελλάδα στον 21ο αιώνα». Τα μαθήματα ελληνικών σπουδών 
καλύπτουν τομείς όπως η γλώσσα, η επικοινωνία, οι διεθνολογία, η επιχειρηματικότητα και η διοίκηση 
επιχειρήσεων, η ιστορία και η πολιτική, η μουσική και η ανθρωπολογία. Οι τάξεις του προγράμματος 
διαπραγματεύτηκαν τον ελληνικό "υγιή" τρόπο ζωής, τις αξίες και την ιδέα, τις δημιουργικές μορφές 
κοινωνικοποίησης, τους τρόπους διατροφής, τις λαϊκές πρακτικές και τις επιδόσεις, τις επιχειρηματικές 
δραστηριότητες και τη νησολογία. Η διδασκαλία υπογραμμίζει πώς οι πτυχές της ελληνικής πραγματικότητας 
υποστηρίζουν την κοινότητα, την αίσθηση του «ανήκειν», τα συναισθήματα σύνδεσης και ασφάλειας, καθώς 
                                                 
1  
STEPS stands for: Science, Technology, Economy, Politics and Society 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
111 
και την ανθεκτικότητα σε μια εποχή κρίσεων. Αυτή η προσέγγιση στη διδασκαλία της ελληνικής γλώσσας 
συνδέει τη γλώσσα με πολλαπλές υπηρεσίες κοινής ωφελείας που συνδέονται με δεξιότητες διαφορετικών 
θεματικών πτυχίων των φοιτητών. 
Η τρέχουσα εργασία έχει ως στόχο να παρουσιάσει την ανάπτυξη υλικών και πτυχών της αυθεντικότητας, 
καθώς και την εκμάθηση βασισμένη στο έργο χρησιμοποιώντας τη γλώσσα ως επαγγελματικό προσόν / 
περιουσιακό στοιχείο. Στη γλωσσική διδασκαλία, η "αυθεντική γλώσσα" διευκολύνει την "ταυτόχρονη, 
απρόσκοπτη απόκτηση" δεύτερης γλώσσας / κουλτούρας με πραγματικό περιβάλλον για μάθηση και 
κατανεμημένη πρακτική, με διαστάσεις εμβάθυνσης. 
Η τρέχουσα εργασία εξηγεί πώς κύρια έργα/αντικείμενα ελληνικής ορολογίας, με ελληνικές λέξεις στα 
Αγγλικά και πλούσια εποπτικά μέσα εξυπηρετούν το καθορισμένο πρόγραμμα σπουδών και τις ανάγκες 
επικοινωνίας για φοιτητές διαφορετικών επιστημονικών αντικειμένων. Παραδείγματα είναι οι ομιλίες του 
Ζολώτα για την πολιτική οικονομία και τη μακροοικονομία, η ομιλία ιατρικής από το Σουκάκο, η ομιλία για την 
αεροπλοΐα του Τσολάκη, το κείμενο οικονομικής πολιτικής στον Οργανισμό Οικονομικής Συνεργασίας και 
Ανάπτυξης του Τάτσου, οι παρεμβάσεις του καθηγητή Τάσιου σε θέματα αρχαίας τεχνολογίας και ορολογίας, 
οι νεολογισμοί της ΕΛΕΤΟ με υποθέσεις πραγματικής ζωής (γλώσσα που επιλύει προβλήματα), η ταινία 
"Οικογενειακή Υπόθεση" με σχέδια μαθημάτων γλώσσας και πολιτισμού μέσα από την ιστορία της 
οικογένειας Ξυλούρη σε δύο ηπείρους, η θεωρία κοινοτικών δικτύων του Χρηστάκη με το βιβλίο 
«Συνδεδεμένοι» κ.λπ. Αυτή η λειτουργική προσέγγιση της γλώσσας προσέλκυσε τους φοιτητές σε μαθήματα 
ελληνικής γλώσσας και ορολογίας τόσο στη Φιλαδέλφεια όσο και στα μαθήματα εξωτερικού, καθώς 
μπορούσαν να βρουν υλικό σχετικό με τα θεματικά τους πεδία (στην επιστήμη, την τεχνολογία, την 
οικονομία, την πολιτική για την κοινωνία), πέρα από το γλωσσικό αλφαβητισμό και την προαγωγή της 
γλώσσας. Πέντε μελέτες περίπτωσης παρουσιάζονται μέσα από συγκεκριμένες προσφορές μαθημάτων στο 
πανεπιστημιακό σύστημα των ΗΠΑ: 
•  Σχέδιο διδασκαλίας για την «Οικογενειακή Υπόθεση» (μουσική, πολιτισμός, διασπορά, κοινωνία) 
•  Έργο ∆ΙΟΛΚΟΣ για τη σύνδεση της Ελληνικής γλώσσας με την τεχνική ορολογία 
•  Θεωρία και ορολογία του κοινωνικού δικτύου (Κοινωνιολογία, δημόσια υγεία, κοινοτικές σπουδές) 
•  Συμβάσεις αθλητικής διακίνησης επαγγελματιών παικτών στο ελληνικό πρωτάθλημα καλαθοσφαίρισης 
(διαχείριση εμπορευμάτων, αθλητικά οικονομικά) 
•  Η αεροπορική ορολογία μέσα από την OMEODEK (σύγχρονοι ελληνικοί νεολογισμοί σε κρίσιμα 
περιβάλλοντα) 
Οι μελέτες περίπτωσης που αντιστοιχούν σε συγκεκριμένα μαθήματα ελληνικής ορολογίας και γλώσσας ή 
ερευνητικές εργασίες στο Πανεπιστήμιο Drexel αποτέλεσαν στοιχείο της καινοτομίας του Προγράμματος 
Ελληνικών Σπουδών. Το γεγονός καταδεικνύει ότι η πρακτική της χρήσης της γλώσσας ως μεταφορέα 
εννοιών των διαφορετικών αντικειμένων μπορεί να γίνει ένα διαφοροποιητικό χαρακτηριστικό της 
διδασκαλίας της ελληνικής γλώσσας. Οι φοιτητές διαφορετικών αντικειμένων μπορούν να χρησιμοποιήσουν 
τα μαθήματα γλώσσας για να κατανοήσουν καλύτερα  το επιστημονικό τους πεδίο. Με το σκεπτικό αυτό οι 
φοιτητές αποκτούν την υποκίνηση να παρακολουθούν τα μαθήματα ελληνικής γλώσσας ως μαθήματα 
εξυπηρέτησης για άλλα κύρια μαθήματα. Έτσι, η ορολογία αναδεικνύει λειτουργικές πτυχές χρησιμότητας. 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
112 
0   Introduction  
The current paper explains how master pieces/artifacts of Greek terminology, with Greek words 
in English and rich media, serve designated curriculum building and communicative purposes for 
students in various majors. Examples include Zolotas, Soukakos, Tsolakis, Tatsos, Tasios, 
ELETO neologisms with real-problem solving cases in language, “Α Family Affair” story-telling 
movie lesson plan, Christakis influential book “Connected” etc. This functional approach to 
language was attracting students to language courses in Drexel Philadelphia campus and Drexel 
Abroad, as they could find material relevant with their majors (in science technology, economy, 
politics for society), beyond linguistic literacy and advancement. Five case studies are being 
presented from specific course offerings in the US University system: 
 
“A Family Affair movie” lesson plan (music, culture, diaspora, society) 
 
DIOLKOS Project to connect Greek with engineering terminology 
 
Social Network theory and terminology (sociology, public health, community 
studies) 
 
Athletic trafficking contracts in Greek Basketball league (commodity management, 
sports economics) 
 
OMEODEK Aviation terminology (modern Greek neologisms in critical 
environments) 
1   Family Affair Movie as Lesson plan  
The Xylouris Family is Greece's most famous musical clan. Three generations of musicians 
uphold and pass on the vibrant tradition of Cretan music, performing ceaselessly to followers 
across the world, from a very young age. The film traces Antonis Xylouris, known as 
Psarantonis, to his son George Xylouris, known as Psarogiorgis to Nikos, Antonis and Apollonia 
studying in Australia. In the documentary, the musical family discover the musical ties that bind 
them. “It captures how music is passed on from father to son to grandchildren, in a contemporary 
Greek-Australian family, brought together and apart by their love of music,” says director 
Aristomenopoulou. “We don’t carry this tradition as a family weight,” explains George Xylouris. 
“It’s part of our lives, of who we are. We need this tradition to live, like we need oxygen.” The 
film’s director and production are running an outreach campaign to make Cretan music known to 
a broader international audience (Anemon, 2015). 
Α sample of the lesson plan is shown below in Figure 1: 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
113 
 
 
 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
114 
 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
115 
 
 
Figure 1: Family Affair Lesson Plan Excerpts 
The lesson plans aim to help participants (viewers and a cohort of language learners through 
musicology): 
● get acquainted with Greek history, culture and society 
● become more familiarised with the Greek language and Cretan dialect 
● stimulate the mind and the senses to different forms of verbal and non-verbal 
communication through music and dance 
● exchange views about identity and sense of belonging to a family, 
community or homeland 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
116 
Materials and methods combine close reading of song lyrics and observation of social 
background aspects in the movie, as well as references to folk aspects like “mantinades’ 
(rhyming couplets) and literature pieces (like the works of Kazantzakis). 
2   DIOLKOS Project to connect Greek with engineering terminology 
1500 years from the first use of the Corinthian Diolkos, the Technical Chamber of Greece in 
collaboration with the Association of Ancient Greek Technology Studies (EMAET) created a 
movie depicting one of the greatest innovations from antiquity. The film of 22 minutes, created 
with the use of 3D animations and it is uniquely represents the one of the most important 
technological innovations of the Greek civilization, the Diolkos: an overland route for the transfer 
of ships between the Saronic and Corinthian gulf along the Isthmus, Corinth, when there was no 
strait. The film has many other technical details, but also extensive scenes of marine life in 
antiquity: gaming, visit at the Temple of Poseidon, fun time in a pub and an emotional 
confrontation. A short snapshot is shown in Figure 2, below: 
 
Figure 2: Diolkos Project Representations and its Route in the Map 
In the study plan the goal of this project is: a) to watch a film and b) respond to questions 
stemming out of the film but which, occasionally, require further research as well as Greek 
linguistic skills. In this cope, students are asked to develop technical skills of using Greek 
language terminology in the engineering major. 
Comprehension questions for Engineering students are the following (provided in Greek to 
challenge the student cohort): 
 1.  Locate 5 parts of the transport mechanism and write “name” and utility” (according to the movie 
script. 
 2.  What are the social events described as connected with everyday life of the workers in the depicted 
transportation; 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
117 
 3.  Which are the counties that “Diolkos” is crossing from one port to the other; Name four major cities 
en route. 
 4.  Summary of the script. What are the technological resources and accomplishments? Are there any 
self-contained episodes in the story-telling narrative; 
 5.  For three tools, write the respective verb in Present, Future and Past Tenses. Create two sentences 
for each and provide the resultant noun. 
 6.  Write 5 keywords that describe the movie, in your mind. 
 
The learning objectives using such assignments are to: 
 
establish an integrated experience in Greek language comprehension.  
 
comprehend the flow of the language, its semantic framework and richness in 
terminology 
The movie creators are Th. P. Tassios, N. Mikas, G. Polyzos, who received two awards so far: 
Best film referred to ancient times at the 5th International Film Festival in Cyprus (November 
2009) and best educational film at the 8th International Meeting of Archaeological Film of the 
Mediterranean Area, Athens (May 2010). 
3   Social Network theory and terminology (sociology, public health, community 
studies) 
Christakis and Fowler (2010) in their landmark publication “Connected” they describe how social 
networks shape our lives. Taking a sophisticated start from their premise we use widely 
established stereotypes about Greek society to speak about network structures in an advanced 
class on sociological methods. Key terminological concepts analyzed are “philotimo, homo 
economicus, homo communicans, homo dictyous”. 
Greece is a brotherly nation that has maintained its diachronic identity by cultivating network 
bonds on spatial, cultural, and communal dimensions. One can hardly understand Greece 
without referring to social relations embedded in the local, regional, or national collective self that 
provides the medium for concrete ties of diaspora Greeks with their homeland.  
In Connected, the authors explain why emotions are contagious, how health behaviors spread, 
why the rich get richer, even how we find and choose our partners. Intriguing and entertaining, 
Connected overturns the notion of the individual and provides a revolutionary paradigm-that 
social networks influence our ideas, emotions, health, relationships, behavior, politics, and much 
more. It will change the way we think about every aspect of our lives.  
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
118 
Greeks are born as individuals in a collectivistic culture, belonging to their extended families, and 
are enculturated in their peer group called parea that is constructed in layers, from their personal 
life to their school days and professional activities. Society is organized in a set of relationships 
that are endemic in Greek identity: “show me your friend to tell you who you are” is a traditional 
respectful proverb. The tradition of patriarchal authority in mainland Greece, coupled with the 
matriarchal regime in most islands, generate the rooting line for central people in a network, at a 
family and community level. Affinity and kinship are ties that facilitate formation of social net-
works in the form of connection in Greece, as well as their functions affecting behavior in the 
form of contagion. Families, friends, schoolmates, religious mates, municipal/civil servants, 
political elites, and professional partners govern everyday life bureaucracies and serve as 
coparticipants in concentric or overlapping networks. If networks are like an eye, then Greek 
social networks are complex lenses that provide the instrument to capture society at large. 
Christakis and Fowler in their analysis argue that social networks may shape people’s lives; the 
case of Greece shows how their surprising power is manifested in real life:  
 
To know who Greeks are, one has to comprehend with whom they are 
connected  
 
The world is small in Greece, and everyone seems virtually connected 
 
Smiles and feelings are contagious; feeling is like breathing  
 
A neighborhood is a concrete fabric of connected members in Greek periphery  
 
Pain is tolerable when it is shared; communal protection cultivates connection  
 
Political networking is a two-edged reciprocal connection  
 
Greeks are social, inevitably connected animals following Aristotle’s principles 
In Greece, network structures are manifested in small-scale business; are protagonists of 
economic activity; score well on social capital; and defend cultural principles in actions, values, 
policies, measures, expectations, and outcomes. Greeks prefer self-organization when they 
recognize common attributes forming affiliations networks. Cultural dimensions introduced by 
Geert Hofstede and Gert Jan Hofstede as power distance, individualism, masculinity, and 
uncertainty avoidance present a partial view of Greek culture that is complemented by 
homophily; deep knowledge of the local environment, people, and their relations; hands-on 
engagement with economic and social life; and referral of trust and solidarity, crucial for living in 
Greece. 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
119 
Life in Greece is organized through networks of socially transmitted habits and the preservation 
of local, regional, and national ideals with an idiosyncratic sense of community. The core value 
of Greek philotimo, as love of honor, safeguards integrity and performance as an enthymeme of 
a socially added value. Greek philotimo as an identity enriches interactional ethos with a social 
dimension that gives it an ethical and sustainable dimension. Syncretism is another 
onomatopoetic term describing Greek connectivity, while newcomers are accepted with 
hospitality (philoxenia) of the Greek homo dictyous (connected man). 
4   Athletic trafficking contracts in Greek Basketball league (commodity 
management, sports economics) 
For more than a half-century now, the United States has had a neat arrangement in the 
international trafficking of athletes. The states of US economy urged me to research the 
economy of Greece, since both share a strong passion for sports and especially basketball. For 
this reason, I think it is important to look at the relationship and the differences these two 
countries share, and how they affect the outcome of their individual economies and the market 
for athletes. Such a study is not available in the courses currently offered at Drexel University 
because there is not a single class which focuses on the relationship between economy and 
sports, particularly by comparing different world cultures. Americans have been playing in 
Europe for decades, but they have usually been fringe N.B.A. players looking for a job or a 
slightly bigger paycheck. Childress’s decision to leave the Hawks may signify a change in how 
N.B.A. players look at Europe (and Greece) as a basketball destination. Childress, 25, has the 
highest profile of any N.B.A. export. He was the No. 6 pick in the 2004 draft and averaged 11.8 
points a game as one of the league’s best sixth men. It is unknown whether Childress will be an 
anomaly or a trailblazer, but Olympiacos’s aggressive ownership has offered hefty contracts to 
N.B.A. players like Chris Webber, James Posey and Michael Finley in the past two years. Those 
big-name players declined, but solid N.B.A. players like Earl Boykins (Italy), Nenad Krstic 
(Russia), Juan Carlos Navarro (Spain) and Jannero Pargo (Russia) leapt overseas this off-
season for more money and bigger roles. 
The moves do not seem to bother (the then) Commissioner David Stern, however. While on a 
speakerphone with a reporter for a recent interview, the N.B.A.’s deputy commissioner, Adam 
Silver, entered Stern’s office. Stern sarcastically said to Silver that he was “wringing his hands” 
wondering how the N.B.A. will move on without Childress and Boykins.  
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
120 
The chances of mass defections or an elite N.B.A. player heading to Europe appear unlikely in 
the near future. But the players who appear most ripe for the taking are solid N.B.A. players like 
Childress who believe they are worth more than the midlevel exception of $5.6 million, which 
Childress likely would have made this season if he had stayed with the Hawks. That has opened 
the eyes of N.B.A. executives, because restricted free agents will be prime targets. 
As show in figure 3, a column of athletic journalist George Kouvaris “Chronia kai Zamania” (It 
has been so many years) was used as a story telling reference of major professional US 
basketball players in the Greek League. 
 
 
Figure 3: The Basketball Market in Greece, and the Hall of Fame 
Key inquiries for students in this course are the following: 
Reasons for NBA Players to leave for Europe/Greece 
a. 
Euro vs US Dollar, Offers second options 
b. 
NBAers’ contracts for Career progress 
c. 
Stats: Europeans in NBA, NBAers in Europe, Stats: Greek players in NBA : 
mature or new brands 
I. 
European Athletes going to the NBA 
a. 
Why do athletes leave Europe for the NBA? 
b. 
Why do athletes return to Europe after a few years? 
c. 
NBA stars from Europe  
II. 
History: Landmarks 
a. 
Basketball in Greece (accomplishments, brand) 
b. 
Success of NBA players in Europe, Success of European players in NBA 
c. 
Firsts: NBA Players to Europe, European players to NBA (Cases of NBA 
player to Greece, Greek players to NBA) 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
121 
The aim of this course was to combine terminology of commodities exchange (Katerinakis, 2004) 
with personal stories and memories of players that cultivate awareness of historical attributes of  
Greek athletic scene since 1980’s, before the current explosion of “Antetokounmpo 
phenomenon”. 
5   OMEODEK Aviation terminology (modern Greek neologisms in critical 
environments) 
The work of OMEODEK paved the way of systematic collection of diverse sources of aviation 
expression means and cultivated a mindset of sharing events, ideas, and  the incorporation of 
professional experience as applied and perceived (Katerinakis, 2018). Data collection acquires 
theoretical significance with the selection of additional data (events, testimonies, visual 
productions, activities, experts, etc.) to exposit all properties of the developing conceptual 
categories and develop them further, at both the individual and social levels (Locke, 1996). 
These resources in an application of grounded theory for data gathering, categorizing and 
analyzing, include the following: 
 
ethnographic field visits to airports, air bases, control towers and aviation authorities; 
 
case studies of landmark flights;  
 
interviews with aviation professionals;  
 
life stories in biographical books and oral narratives;  
 
artifacts, cultural texts and productions via a special drama series on fighter pilots;  
 
observational, historical, interactional and visual texts, in documentaries and media 
interviews. 
 
Figure 4: Two Landmark Flights with Greek Accident Investigation Proceedings 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
122 
Responders are asked to take the point of view of their role, so that silence would emerge as a 
phenomenon with multiple dimensions: silence from whom, addressed to whom, used by the 
controller or the crew member, perceived by the controller, crew member, an external pilot or the 
airline operator. Since a flight is accomplished in a collaborative environment NASA introduced a 
managerial requirement in 1979, promoting the cockpit resource management that evolved to 
Crew Resource Management (CRM). Namely, the prompting device of CRM was the triplet: 
communication, communication, and communication. Language is expressing awareness, a key 
issue in any flight situation. 
In the analysis of oral and written discourse in aviation it is important to understand the 
mechanics of language (and the language of special purposes used in aviation), but how human 
actors practice “what to say to whom” and “how to say it appropriately in a particular situation”. 
That is the notion of communicative competence introduced by Hymes (1972), which defines 
what is correct and what is not (according to aviation phraseology and institutional contact 
standards). 
Also, competence is needed in order to decide when and where to use language appropriately 
(like the motivating, collaborating language devices, the suspending order to co-pilots, the 
laconic calls to Control Tower, the readback of important instructions, the non-verbalisms that 
communicate emotion, activate mediated banner messages to the cabin or message updates to 
the passengers seats with no announcement)  and with whom (controller, co-pilot, cabin crew 
members,  passengers as a collective).  
Another rather latent conceptual dimension is the representative nature of situational awareness 
(SA). As it happens in communication patterns, “the participants' confidence” in their situation 
awareness might be different than their “actual situation awareness”. Receivers perception of a 
message may be different that the intended content of the message. SA, especially in the 
expansion of the three types, implies clear communicative dimensions as human actors should 
act upon, respond to, and confirm/correct important informational cues. Apart from that, human 
communication forwards the information flow functioning in L(ocal)A type, and facilitates the 
move to T(ransitory)A type. The G(lobal)A type needs also reporting and critical evaluation and 
access to privileged operational and mission information. Awareness (of all types) is internal to 
the individual and the meaning making process, and does not reside on any (technological) 
information display. The individual actor develops awareness when considering the interpersonal 
interactions and relationships with relevant communication. Interpersonal communication, here, 
includes the form of the “individual-group-team”, or the form of “own vs opposing force/group” in 
command and control contexts. The major linguistic challenge and criterion for constructions 
flight neologisms is: "spoken not yet heard; heard not yet understood; understood not yet 
agreed; agreed not yet applied; and applied not yet always applied."  
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 12o Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 7–9 Νοεμβρίου 2019 
123 
The practice of using language as a carrier of meaning for different disciplines became a 
differentiating attribute of the Greek language teaching and motivated students of different 
majors to follow Greek language courses for “terminology, etymology and functional utility 
aspects”. 
References 
Anemon (2015). A Family Affair Documentary and Lesson Planning. Anemon Production 
(Aristomenopoulou, Director). 
Christakis, N.A. and Fowler, J.H. (2009). Connected: the surprising power of our social networks 
and how they shape our lives. New York: Little, Brown. 
Hymes, D. H. (1972). On Communicative Competence. In Pride, J. B., & Holmes, J. (Eds.), 
Sociolinguistics, 269-293. Baltimore, USA: Penguin Education, Penguin Books Ltd 
Katerinakis, T (2004). Economist Logion. Sideris Publications, Athens 
Katerinakis T. (2018). Τhe Social Construction of Knowledge in Mission Critical Environments. 
Springer Publishing. 
Locke, K. (1996). Rewriting the discovery of grounded theory after 25 years? Journal of 
Management Inquiry, 5(3), 239−245. 
Thamel, P. (2008). Big Fat Greek Contract Makes Europe Irresistible, NYT, Oct 11, 2008 
Appendix: English to Greek Glossary 
 
Basic Term in English 
Βασικός Όρος στο Ελληνικά 
1 
Homo Dictyous 
∆ικτυακός Άνθρωπος 
2 
Situational Awareness 
Επίγνωση κατάστασης 
3 
Athletic Trafficking 
Αθλητική Κινητικότητα 
4 
Nissology 
Nησολογία 
 
 
 
Theodoros Katerinakis 
Adjunct Faculty, On-Line Learning Council, 
Drexel University 
Ε-mail: tkaterinakis@gmail.com 
Maria Chnaraki, PhD
Faculty Head for Drexel Abroad in Greece,  Scientific 
Consultant, Office of the Governor, Region of Crete 
Official Representative, World Council of Cretans 
Ε-mail: mariahnaraki@gmail.com 
 
 
