SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/ELETO-EAFT_Conference_2013-11-07/ELETO-EAFT-Symposium-2013_Anna-Lena%20Bucher_shortpaper_EN.pdf

EAFT–ELETO Symposium 
“National Languages and Terminology  
in Higher Education, Science & Technology” 
Athens, Greece, 7 November 2013 
 
A Swedish perspective 
Anna-Lena Bucher 
The problem 
Almost nine out of ten dissertations written in Sweden today are written in English. This has 
been the case since the mid-1990’s (however, the dominance of English in dissertations has 
been a fact since the 1940’s). The highest number of dissertations written in English (94 %) 
can be found within the natural sciences, the corresponding number for the social sciences 
being 65 %, and 37 % for the humanities. Most of the dissertations being written can be found 
within the field of medicine, science and technology. Three out of ten have an abstract written 
in Swedish1.  
Since the beginning of the new millennium, the visibility of English in higher education has 
increased substantially, due in part to courses being taught exclusively in English, but also 
because the use of course literature written in English has increased. 
Most people in Sweden agree on the fact that the use of English in higher education is 
beneficial and necessary for Sweden to be able to participate in and contribute to an 
international scientific co-operation. But there are also those who see the growing dominance 
of English as a threat, especially if it is happening at the expense of the Swedish language. 
Two major factors are being particularly highlighted; the potential domain loss and the risk of 
a loss of ability. 
Domain loss refers here to the situation where the native language loses its position and 
becomes less useable, thus less used within a particular field. Loss of ability has to do partly 
with the learning ability of students which diminishes when courses are being taught in 
English, since many students struggle when reading academic and otherwise specialised texts 
in that language. It refers also to the fact that not all teachers are so good at teaching in 
English. Studies show that younger teachers are generally more positive towards teaching 
entirely in English, whereas older teachers tend to see potential problems with it, e.g. having 
                                                     
1 Figures are from 2010. 
to abandon a familiar teaching method in which, for example jokes can play a part. 
Some argue that a division could be made between research, research information and 
education; research and education could be conducted in English, whereas research 
information could be given in Swedish. Others have argued against this, pointing to the fact 
that such a division cannot be made because the fields overlap and influence one another. 
Amongst other things, it has been pointed out that it is not possible to successfully inform 
about one’s research in Swedish if proper Swedish terminology is lacking. Therefore, there 
are compelling democratic reasons to adopt a multi-lingual approach and strengthen the 
positions of both Swedish and English as main academic languages. 
The solutions 
• Language Act → language policies, guidelines etc. 
• Methodology for creating national language terminology through networking 
• National termbank and other tools for finding establised – and launching newly-
created – terminology 
• Applying tools for automatic term extraction, ontology construction etc. on course 
literature  
• Co-operation with publishing houses to simplify the creation multilingual term lists 
for monolingual course literature 
As a result of many previous debates concerning language, some higher education institutions 
have developed different strategies for dealing with their choice of language, and use of 
language. A study conducted in 2009 showed that, of the 37 academic institutions that had 
been studied, 11 had some kind of official documents on language (policies, guidelines or 
plans). 
Conclusion 
I will conclude by telling in more detail about two higher education institutions which have 
developed a language document, have appointed staff to deal with the goals and aims of the 
document – and which are also addressing their terminological responsibility in a way that is 
in line with TNC’s view.  
Swedish Centre for Terminology TNC 
Anna-Lena Bucher 
