SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/6th%20Conference/6th_06-02-OpitzKurtPaper_V05.pdf

ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
1
6   Mixed signals: thoughts and second thoughts about terminology 
 
Kurt Opitz 
 
ABSTRACT 
Terminology is characterized by a variety of features which, if the former is considered in a linguistic 
context, may appear alien, if not contradictory, setting it apart from ordinary language and customary 
communicative behavior. Looked at singly, terms appear to meet notably three conditions: they are 
considered 
–  context-independent 
–  connotation-free and 
–  semantically stable, i.e. unaffected by developmental change.  
While those characteristics do indeed seem to offer a useful instrument for unambiguous usage, they 
are also responsible for the disadvantage of making terminology opaque and dysfunctional to a large 
number of users as it is with increasing frequency appropriated by commercial and political interests. As 
a result, terminology as a linguistic concept is about to lose its intended effectiveness along with its 
conceptual rigor. In order to preserve its socially meaningful role, a pragmatically-oriented revision of its 
aims and methods is overdue. 
 
Ανάμεικτα σήματα: Σκέψεις και συλλογισμοί περί ορολογίας 
 
Kurt Opitz 
ΠΕΡΙΛΗΨΗ 
Η ορολογία χαρακτηρίζεται από ποικιλία γνωρισμάτων τα οποία, εάν αυτή εξετασθεί σε γλωσσολογικό 
πλαίσιο, μπορεί να εμφανίζονται ως αλλότρια, αν όχι αντιφατικά, κάνοντάς την να ξεχωρίζει από την 
κανονική γλώσσα και την συνήθη επικοινωνιακή συμπεριφορά. Εξεταζόμενοι μεμονωμένα, οι όροι 
εμφανίζονται ότι πληρούν κυρίως τρεις συνθήκες. Θεωρούνται: 
–  ανεξάρτητοι από το συγκείμενο 
–  απαλλαγμένοι από συνδηλώσεις και 
–  σημασιολογικά σταθεροί, δηλαδή ανεπηρέαστοι από αναπτυξιακές μεταβολές. 
Ενώ αυτά τα χαρακτηριστικά πράγματι φαίνεται ότι προσφέρουν ένα χρήσιμο εργαλείο για αναμφίσημη 
χρήση, είναι ταυτόχρονα και υπεύθυνα για το ότι η ορολογία καθίσταται αδιαφανής και δυσλειτουργική 
σε μεγάλο πλήθος χρηστών αφού, με αυξανόμενη συχνότητα, την ιδιοποιούνται εμπορικά και πολιτικά 
συμφέροντα. Ως αποτέλεσμα, η ορολογία ως γλωσσολογική έννοια κινδυνεύει να χάσει την σκοπούμενη 
αποτελεσματικότητά της μαζί με την εννοιακή αυστηρότητά της. Για τη διατήρηση του κοινωνικά 
σημαντικού ρόλου της, επιβάλλεται η αναθεώρηση των σκοπών και μεθόδων της με πραγματολογικό 
προσανατολισμό, αναθεώρηση η οποία έχει ήδη καθυστερήσει. 
 
 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
2
 
 
0.   Introduction  
So prolific and various has technical and intellectual work now 
become, as compared with previous centuries, that natural and 
controlled evolution of technical terms can no longer be relied on to 
ensure unambiguity and efficiency in the use of language. 
 
Wüster 1955 
0.1 
Like any event in the real world, the activity of terminologists is encumbered by a 
cluster of paradoxes and contradictions. The expectations on which Eugen Wüster 
had predicated his groundbreaking work since the early 1930s have in many ways 
come true; in retrospect they may indeed seem almost too modest. Not only has 
“technical intellectual work” exploded within the life-span of barely two generations into 
a firework of inventions and novel processes, but the conditions under which such 
activity is taking place have dramatically changed as well. The transition from a 
nationally-based organization of scientific and economic activity into a global one fully 
vindicates Wüster’s prescient conviction of the overriding need to control language as 
a vital instrument of such activity. At the same time, his prophecy has proved overly 
optimistic in regard to the latter part of the above quotation. His chief aim, “to ensure 
unambiguity and efficiency in the use of language” through standardization of existing 
and new technical terms, has not been entirely achieved; there are in fact 
developments that suggest an increasingly uneasy future for the concept of 
terminology as outlined by Wüster and its practical application.  
1   Wüster’s technological bias and the consequences 
1.1 
There are several reasons for this. For one, Wüster himself was by training an 
electrical engineer with no particular insight into the ways and means of language. He 
perceived language as a closed system that can be manipulated in accord with logical 
principles very much like a numerically-based science and its material manifestations, 
susceptible to arbitrary, though rational, control within and beyond national linguistic 
borders. Limited by the terminological scope of his vision, Wüster hardly 
acknowledged the existence of such - more problematic - areas of terminological 
interest as the humanities and the social sciences: areas growing in importance as the 
need for social and political organization of ever more complex structures is becoming 
apparent. The nascent academic discipline that grew out of Wüster’s efforts to 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
3
establish Fachsprache as the proper domain of terminology was accordingly 
dominated by the technological bias of the LSP (language for specific purposes) idea. 
Since those beginnings in the 1980s, the academic discipline of terminology has - 
ironically - muted into an abstract science practiced increasingly under the umbrella of 
philosophy: the business of making and testing of terms has, in other words, passed 
from the hands of the practical user almost entirely into the field of theory and 
speculative research. At the other end of the spectrum, international planning and 
administration, notably at the level of Infoterm in Vienna, has lost much of its initial 
enthusiasm and direction. Along the way of these developments, a lot of confusion 
and misunderstanding about terminology and its role has been disseminated around 
the world, together with some benefits to language teaching and a sizeable output of 
publications, notably specialized dictionaries.  
1.2 
Without doubt, the various approaches to the phenomenon of terminology were made 
in a problem-oriented spirit. But have they always been focussed on the real 
problems? Wüster’s legacy was a lexeme-based approach concerned chiefly with a fit 
of semantics with morphology, to be achieved in a modern spirit of industrial and 
social management that represents au fond globalism avant la lettre. Following along 
the same path, lexicography has been preoccupied with the non-linguistic issue of 
Standardization, to the detriment of such areas vital to language as pragmatics or 
psychology which would afford a wider, more comprehensive perspective. The 
reductive isolation of the term from the system of language elements and their 
interplay on which a large part of research in the field has come to be based, has not 
yielded commensurate results. If the failure to appraise conditions and requirements 
for a comprehensive study of terminology is surely one reason for its limited progress, 
another is the persistent tendency to locate the discipline and its application within a 
rather narrow range of relatively uncomplicated “hard” subjects in science and 
technology, medicine, or - more recently - the vast field of law and administration 
which seems destined to remain impervious to all attempts at effective management, 
at least as far as the aspect of international standardization is concerned. But what 
about “soft” fields of interest as e.g. Nina Puuronen’s “concepts of action” (Puuronen 
1997)? And is not the area of subjective beliefs and judgements as essential to social 
cohesion and the functioning of the body politic as the objective processing of 
unambiguous statements of fact is to efficient economic performance? 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
4
1.3 
To argue that it is the abstract nature of “soft” concepts that scares potential research 
away, is to acknowledge but a small part of the truth, for abstraction, besides being a 
necessary precondition for any systematic assessment of reality, lies at the root of all 
work related to the physical world as well, in the form of ordering notions like weights, 
measurements and general descriptions as in fact postulated by Wüster. A 
fundamental impediment to terminological work in the “soft” portion of experience lies 
in the fact that, in contrast to departments of the material world, it is not informed by 
absolute and immutable truths to which the terminologist can refer. Lacking those, 
standards necessarily become flexible, adapting to changing historical circumstances: 
the very hotbed of ambiguity. The resulting question is, Does this mean we must 
abandon all hope of including “soft” knowledge fields in the purview of terminology? 
Alternatively, can our concept term be modified to fit both, “hard” and “soft” 
knowledge? Or should we give up the struggle altogether, conceding that Wüster’s 
concept of terms just does not work for a sizeable portion of human experience? The 
answer(s) will in no small measure depend on our understanding of what terms are 
and how they come about. 
2   Meaning and function of terms 
2.1 
Terminology as part of the system of languages has come to be perceived as a 
phenomenon of the 20th century concomitant with modern civilization. That such a 
view is hardly justified becomes apparent in a quick glance at our parent civilization of 
Greek and Roman antiquity where, notably, a complex legal system and its 
administrative consequences gave rise to a body of dedicated language instruments 
that can only be described as technical terms -termini technici - satisfying all those 
demands which we tend to place on such lexical material today as well. The very 
word, terminus, reflects as much the concept of clarification and delimitation contained 
in its original sense of “stake” or “cornerstone” as it suggests a continuum from the 
physical to the immaterial realm in its application. Since the mid-14th century the word 
turns up in the English language with the marked sense of “expression” and eventually 
- in the 19th century - gives rise to its derivation terminology, “system of terms”, without 
arousing any noticeable attention from leading linguists until well into the 20th century. 
Terminology as an object of language research was from the outset considered in the 
light of standardization, following Wüster’s elaborate schemes postulating specific 
functions for concepts, terms, and their correspondence, as well as detailed rules for 
their use under the aegis of contemporary international agencies. 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
5
2.2 
The recognition that terms as a specific component of the lexicon have existed in the 
languages of all organized societies for one or the other social function long before 
being discovered by Wüster as a salient element of modern civilization, should direct 
our attention to their fundamental nature and role. This has undoubtedly been one of 
marking and differentiation - needs that languages would have even in their early 
rudimentary state of an as yet undeveloped lexical spread. It is therefore reasonable 
to assume that terminology in its origins was merely the habit of semantic 
discrimination practiced on a unique ”all-purpose” lexicon as the need to do so arose 
in certain conventional communicative situations. Morphologically such “language for 
specific purposes” would be in no way different from “ordinary” speech, with existing 
single words or collocations turning into “lexicalized” terms on the strength or at the 
discretion of particular situational requirements, and losing that distinctive quality as 
soon as the communicative situation reverted back to “normal”.1 Beside these there 
might exist a small group of words associated with notions of taboo, referring to the 
divine, sacred or supernatural, which were from the outset reserved exclusively for 
such restricted use,2 their function has always been symbolic rather than indicative or 
descriptive and hence linguistically inert. As a general observation it might in other 
words be said that “term” denotes a context-dependent function, but not an intrinsic 
quality, of a lexeme. 
3   Types and their intrinsic limitations 
3.1 
Ad-hoc quality determined by circumstantial factors and intentions, rather than existing 
as an independent lexical item, a term necessarily operates pro tempore as well: its 
signifié may change from one application to the next one or evolve in the course of 
time into something else, requiring the term to be accommodated to the new situation. 
This is of course a natural condition of all language use, and the expectation, that 
terminology can somehow be exempt from that general rule, would indeed be very 
unrealistic. Yet this is precisely the aim set by Wüster and pursued at the policy level 
ever since through ISO norms and international planning efforts. The chief tendency of 
these efforts appears to be the creation of highly referential and unambiguous 
                                                 
1  
A large number of pre-modern terms originated in this way as a special case of polysemy when 
common lexemes like vessel, plane, thread adopted a special meaning in certain contexts or among 
certain speakers. 
2  
This group represented by such items as God, the Virgin, Paradise etc. effectively includes all 
proper names used as terms: Watt, Kelvin, Volt and a host of (old and recent) trade names: Mason, 
jar, (to) Hoover etc. 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
6
dedicated terms that are considered unalterable under any circumstances. The facts 
of modern life shaped by swift shifts and developments at many levels should, 
however, caution us against such an assumption: whether created ex nihilo or though 
an act of arbitrary selection from a number of existing alternatives, terms must be 
expected to enjoy but a limited life-span of effective application. There are several 
reasons to this, of which progress in the technical field itself may be the least 
problematic one, easily overcome by coining a novel term that soon enough will 
replace the “unemployed” previous one. A more consequential effect of this process 
will often be the rapid passage of the new term into uncontrolled general usage where 
it sooner or later will lose its distinctive quality in becoming “fuzzy” through 
indiscriminate handling. Neologisms and obsolescence seem but two sides of the 
same coin, one calling forth the other in like manner. 
3.2 
The type and nature of terms apparently matters only marginally in this process. The 
demand for differentiating descriptive criteria created by the elaboration of 
nomenclatures and thesauri is frequently met through the device of binary appellation, 
i.e. collocations consisting of a comprehensive basic designation coupled with a 
delimiting modifier of the type gross weight, fiberglass etc; other examples of this 
conventional practice are found in the Linnéan classification system of botanical and 
zoological names. What these terminologies and others modeled after them all have in 
common, is their nominal character, combined with the increased defining potential of 
collocation: two aspects that characterize terminologies regardless of language or field 
of application even though they may differ in the degree of complexity depending on 
the combinatory rules and patterns of the languages concerned and the degree of 
abstraction which the term must convey. The recent proliferation of terms that confer a 
definite identity to their referenda without offering descriptive markers has introduced a 
type that is likely to be much more short-lived and at the same time more ambiguous 
as a consequence of its semantic hermeticism: Velcro, BlackBerry or iPod can only be 
decoded at the price of comparatively ample world knowledge and are thus 
particularly prone to misinterpretation and hence, an early demise as effective 
descriptors. The wide and unreserved use of such terms of the market place which 
come and pass with the ever-accelerating seasons of economic activity, suggests that 
the idea of stable and controlled terms in the Wüsterian sense cannot work. 
So, what is to be done? How can Wüster’s initiative be made more fruitful? 
 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
7
4   Pragmatic proposals  
4.1 
Eugen Wüster’s vision of a strictly controlled and minutely defined terminological 
standard has taken shape in various ISO norms as a key element of language 
planning. Characteristically, such planning tends to pursue its aim of being effective by 
adopting a policy of total inclusiveness and universality of method. To proceed this 
way, is to amass a large number of conditions that cannot be equally well met by all of 
the various elements affected and to generate, with much cost and effort, a welter of 
redundant or otherwise irrelevant details.3 A pragmatic approach based on criteria of 
priority could avoid some of the least tractable features of standardization by 
concentrating on a few carefully selected problems whose solution can be expected to 
make a significant contribution to communication at the local as well as the global 
level. Instead of attempting to emulate the ways and aims of science - which has little 
need for such support - terminology, as an agent of public interest and as a locus of 
research, could profitably apply its resources to issues of more immediately social 
concern. One among the most pressing of those issues, the language of policy and 
public debate is a hitherto little-explored field where terminological control is urgently 
needed, albeit for reductive, rather than for generative, effect: contrary to their usual 
aim of differentiating and expanding a dedicated special lexicon for expert use, 
terminologists might direct their efforts at clarifying the language of political discourse 
in a way that enables all citizens to take part in it effectively and responsibly. Cliché 
terms need to be identified and analyzed, fashionable expressions exposed as the 
meaningless gestures they are; quite generally, language must be shown to matter. 
4.2 
There must, in other words, be a shift of focus. Leaving behind its preoccupation with 
prescriptive schemes, terminology should discover and accept its potential role as an 
instrument of education and enlightenment. This shift of focus and methodology would 
necessarily affect the perspectives of terminological research and, by implication, of 
the entire field of linguistics which would be well served by a small dose of new 
pragmatism. The salutary effect of global challenges on local politics may consist in an 
unorthodox, yet logical and necessary, turn away from grand schemes and towards 
                                                 
3  
As an example, here is definition ISO/DIS1087-1 (1997): (excerpt) 
 
 
Object: anything perceivable or conceivable 
 
 
NB Object may be material (e.g. an engine, a sheet of paper, a diamond), 
 
 
immaterial (e.g. conversion ratio, a project plan) or imagined (e.g. a unicorn). 
 
Concept: unit of knowledge created by a unique combination of characteristics. 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
8
practicable modest measures that have an immediate impact on the lives of people, 
and terminology can be part of that process. 
5   Conclusion 
5.1 
The attempt to fix, Wüster-style, the total register of specific applications of a language 
in a prescriptive grid for total control, was a brave but illusory undertaking bound to fail 
in the long run; and the expectation, to be able to achieve that control at the level of 
the single lexeme, ignores basic facts of linguistic behavior. A realistic appraisal of all 
factors involved must conclude that terms are basically words operating as restricted 
representations of phenomena belonging to the real world; applied within specific 
limited contexts, their effect is of a transitory nature, arising and subsiding as they play 
their temporary role for the sole benefit of evanescent communicative situations and in 
the company of a multitude of mutually dependent factors. To the extent that certain 
such communicative situations are themselves part of specific controlled operations, 
terms designed for, and used within, such context may occasionally be represented by 
exclusively conceived, disambiguated lexemes. Yet even instances of such privileged 
effectiveness remain subjected to the conditions of general linguistic variety and 
change. This circumstance serves as a reminder that terminology is most effectively 
practiced, not as a phenomenon of pure science and technology, but in the purview of 
the social sciences. 
5.2 
Previous activities on behalf of terminology, both at the practical and the research 
level, have unfortunately neglected the latter aspect to the disadvantage of either 
approach. Planning and standardization of terms has largely bypassed the social and 
political sciences in its choice of target areas, thus missing the chance to gain a better 
understanding of the complexity of the task, while linguistic research has failed to  
address its object with a sufficiently open mind so as to ask important fundamental 
questions and to accept inconvenient answers. 
Bibliography 
[1] Sergey Grinev  
“Some semiotic aspects of terminology science”, in Proceedings of 
the 11th European Symposium on Language for Special Purposes, 
Copenhagen 1997, vol. I, 300-307 
[2] Nina Puuronen  
“On describing dynamic concepts – a philosophical and 
terminological approach”, in Multilingualism in Specialist 
Communication, Vienna 1995, vol. 2, 1093-1120 
[3] Viktor Smith 
“Polysemy in Terminology”, in Proceedings of the 11th European 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
9
Symposium on Language for Special Purposes, Copenhagen 1997, 
vol. I, 408-419 
[4] H.J. Swann  
French Terminologies in the Making, New York 1918 
[5] Eugen Wüster  
Internationale Sprachnormung in der Technik, besonders in der 
Elektrotechnik.[1931] Bonn 1970 
[6] Eugen Wüster  
“Standardization of technical terms”, in Report Ref. 96/5815, 
UNESCO, Paris 1955 
[7] Eugen Wüster  
"Die allgemeine Terminologielehre - ein Grenzgebiet zwischen 
Sprachwissenschaft, Logik, Ontologie, Informatik und den 
Sachwissenschaften“, in Linguistics 119 (1974), 61-106 
 
 
 
Dr. Kurt Opitz, prof. emeritus, 
Address: Brahmsallee 75 
20144 Hamburg / Germany 
tel. : +49 40 422 1970 
fax : +49 40 422 2366 
 
 
 
 
