SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/ELETO-EAFT_Conference_2013-11-07/ELETO-EAFT-Symposium-2013_AnnaAnastasiadis-Symeonidis-Abstract_EN.pdf

EAFT–ELETO Symposium 
“National Languages and Terminology  
in Higher Education, Science & Technology” 
Athens, Greece, 7 November 2013 
 
 
The contribution of the Greek language  
to the formation of international scientific terminology 
Anna Anastassiadis-Symionidis 
ansym@lit.auth.gr 
 
We first examine what is considered to be Greek. That is to say we refer to the various 
situations of borrowing Greek by European languages, and pay particular attention to lexical 
units (l.u.) that the European languages have borrowed from Greek whether directly (direct 
borrowing from Greek) or through Latin (direct borrowing from Latin), as well as the l.u. that 
European languages have constructed using elements from AG. Next we follow this by 
focusing on the fact that borrowing mainly concerns academic and scientific lexis/terms as 
opposed to everyday, general lexis. The third part of our work examines the types of 
influences undergone by European languages through adoption from AG, whether an 
influence be in the form of AG combining forms, prefixes, suffixes e.g. ΑG μικρο- > micro- (≠ 
macro-, méga(lo)-), ἀντι- > anti-, -ικός > -ic, or formed from the use of Term Formation Rules. 
Finally we pose the question of why destiny has reserved such a destination for the Greek 
language. 
In 1957, in his role of Greek representative, Xenofon Zolotas made a speech to the IMF 
which tweaked international interest because, while his text was in English, the terms in it all 
came from Greek.  
During the Renaissance, French, English and German scholars, in order to cope with the 
demands made on them by the increasing number of new concepts, turned to the methods 
used by the Greeks to increase their vocabulary. These scholars were Hellenists or were 
advised by Hellenists. Thus, onto the European languages were grafted not only new AG 
elements but also new Term Formation Rules that copied those of AG, e.g. ballistics/French 
balistique ‘βαλλιστική’ < ΑG βάλλω. 
 
I) 
We will consider of Greek origin any word or element that occurs as a result of 
transcription using the Latin alphabet, e.g. M I K P O B I O – M I C R O B E. Three cases 
can be included here: a) the emergence of new l.u. with AG elements, b) the emergence 
of new l.u. with indigenous elements whose construction is due to borrowing from AG 
(loan translations), e.g. χειρό-γραφον > manu-script, and c) emergence caused by 
borrowing of new meanings further to an existing l.u. We will deal with only the first case, 
wherein we distinguish three sub-cases: 
A) A European language borrows directly from AG (direct loans from AG), e.gs French 
of the 16th century borrowed misogyne from AG μισογύνης, in the 18th century, the noun 
ἐγκέφαλος took the form encéphale etc. 
2 
 
B) A European language borrows an item from Latin that had been borrowed from the 
AG, e.g. the French. bulbe ‘bulb’ comes from the Latin bulbus, which comes from the AG 
βολβός (direct loans from Latin). 
C) A European language constructs a word using elements borrowed from AG, e.g 
French coins the word microbe ‘μικρόβιο’ by borrowing from AG the elements μικρός, 
βίος. 
Given the AG items appear in similar forms and with the same meaning in many 
languages, they belong to the category of internationalisms from an etymological point of 
view, e.g telephone. In terms of teaching and psycholinguistics, they belong to the 
category of cognates (cross-linguistic homotypes) that can be used as a key strategy in 
facilitating the understanding of scientific text and the teaching of scientific discourse and 
terminology. 
II) In thematic terms, the type of word in the AG that is subject to borrowing belongs to 
academic and scientific vocabulary, i.e. it has to do with terms. The names of the 
sciences are stated in terms borrowed from AG, e.gs archeology, economics, psychology, 
but also generally the terminology of a science is based on terms borrowed from AG, e.gs 
basic terms of medicine, e.gs symptoms, diagnosis, therapy; branches of medicine, e.gs 
hematology, anatomy, gynecology; names of diseases, e.g. asthma; symptoms, e.g. 
paralysis; treatment, e.g. chemotherapy. Other disciplines: mathematics, geometry, 
trigonometry, e.gs arithmetic, centre, diameter, symmetry, theorem, scheme, semitone, 
logarithm, as well as geometric shapes: circle, ellipse, hexagon; physics, e.gs microcosm, 
macrocosm, atmosphere; astronomy, e.gs chaos , planet, comet; biology, e.gs embryo, 
enzyme; 
geography, 
e.gs 
horizon, 
ocean; 
geology, 
e.gs 
epicentre, 
petro-; 
philosophy/logic, e.gs axiomatic, dialectic, dialogue, dilemma; literature, e.gs gramma, 
dialect, dissyllabic, diphthong; rhetoric, e.gs. epic, poetry, metaphor, metonymy; sports, 
e.gs Olympics, athlete, gymnastics, pentathlon, stadium; theatre, e.gs dialogue, drama, 
comedy, protagonist, scene, tragedy, choreography; art, e.gs muses museum, aesthetics; 
music, e.gs harmony, guitar, melody, pentagram, prosody, rhythm; painting, e.g. icon; 
psychology, e.gs (internal) dialogue, ecstasy; human character, defects and divergences, 
e.gs ironic, irony, cynical, cynicism, hypocrite, hypocrisy, melancholy; mythical heroes 
and great men (generals, philosophers, scientists) whose names are connected with 
salient attributes, e.gs narcissus (narcissism), chimera, Ariadne's thread, Pillars of 
Hercules, Euclidean geometry, draconian measures, Oedipus complex, platonic love; 
Christian faith and institutions, theology, e.gs Christ, angel, heresy, apocalypse, apostolic, 
baptize, demon, devil, cemetery, liturgy, martyr, prophet, psalm. 
III) Borrowings, however, are not limited to terms whether they be monosyllabic or 
polysyllabic, but involve borrowing sub-word units of the types:  
A) Roots that result in semantic-etymological pairings with another word in Indo-European 
level, e.g. the AG term κύκλος becomes circle/ Fr. cercle, but coexists with the combining 
form cycl(o)-, i.e. in hemicycle/hémicycle, cyclotron.  
B) Prefixes, e.g. AG ἀντι-> anti- e.g. antiatomique, and suffixes , e.g. AG -ειδής Æ -oid, 
e.g. ellipsoid ‘ελλειψοειδής’. 
3 
 
C) Rules, (i) e.g. compound words retain the AG order. For example, based on AE 
γεωγραφία > geography/Fr. géographie, photographie (> MG φωτογραφία) is made up in 
French of the words φῶς, γραφὴ as well as (ii) the stem vowel -o-, e.g.  webometrics.  
In our opinion, borrowing of this type is more important than terminological borrowing, 
because it is both more dynamic and also in this way the Greek language influences the 
system for building terms in the recipient language, which in parallel with the rules at its 
disposal also adopts the mechanism of construction of terms in AG, namely, the AG Term 
Formation Rules in order to name new concepts that were unknown to the Greeks. 
European languages contain many prefixes of AG origin, e.gs. a-/an- , anti-, arch-, dys-, 
epi-, meta-, para-, peri-, pre-, syn-/sym-, hypo-, hyper-, etc., and many suffixes of AG 
origin, e.gs. -ic, -ism, the medical suffix -itis ‘inflammation’, e.g. arthritis, -oma, 
‘tumour/swelling’, e.g. melanoma, hematoma, in chemistry, -on ‘noble gases’, e.gs. argon, 
krypton, in physics, -on, ‘elementary particle’, e.gs hadron, baryon, in linguistics, -ema 
‘unit of the abstract level of language’, e.g. phoneme, morpheme. 
IV) We put forward 2 kinds of reasons to explain why AG has played this role. 
A) Linguistic reasons. AG has a rich vocabulary, because its speakers intensively 
cultivated it in all its sources (sciences, arts, etc.). During the Renaissance and in 
subsequent centuries AG was richer than the European languages, which had started 
independent life just a few centuries before although there are other rich languages 
nowadays. Also, Greek had the capability of being able to coin many words through 
derivation and compounding, i.e. through procedures which enable the combination of 
elements into a new whole. In particular, it has many such items, over 100 counted only 
combining forms, prefixes and suffixes, i.e. basic building blocks such as ἀντι- > anti-, 
μετα- > meta-, -ικός > -ic. However, Greek is not the only European language that has 
such elements. 
B) Extralinguistic reasons. Greek was spoken by people who explored the world 
surrounding them and mankind in body and soul, striving not only to observe 
systematically in order to describe but to interpret phenomena, substance and structure of 
things, leaving aside the old beliefs and legends. They tried to understand and interpret 
the world in a scientific way through passionately researching the truth and by reducing 
the specific and the variable to the abstract and generalising, using a standard/model. As 
Professor and Member of the Academy Theodosis Tassios has maintained in his rich 
work (EMAET http://kotsanas.gr/gr/index_ekthemata.html), they developed technology 
that was advanced for that time on the one hand as a result of applying the theoretical 
knowledge they had gained and on the other, being in absolute connection to their 
everyday lives, which were facilitated by the various technological innovations. 
Summarizing, we can say that Greece gave to the West what is now referred to as the 
Latin alphabet and to the East during the Christianization of the Slavs, the Cyrillic 
alphabet. She founded almost all sciences and by extension European culture, and 
highlighted the humanitarian attitude. From the time of the Renaissance, in particular, she 
laid the spiritual foundations of Europe, and the Greek culture was again the driving force 
in the evolution of Europe. This resulted in the catalytic linguistic contribution of the Greek 
language to European languages through classical Greco-Roman teachings. This effect is 
complemented by the influence of Christianity, where again the Greek language, as the 
4 
 
original language of the Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles, influenced European 
languages. 
In such a way was constructed as a result of conceptual explosion, a stock of words 
needed in all sciences, or what is today called academic vocabulary. The Europeans 
borrowed the tools of thought which the Greeks invented alongside the words that 
expressed them. Thus was born metrology and the names of measuring instruments such 
as 
barometer, 
thermometer, 
chronometer, 
and 
the 
names 
of 
observational 
instrumentation, e.g. microscope, periscope, telescope. Hence arose the need to create 
classification categories. The Ancient Greeks broadened the role undertaken by the 
element -ειδής < εἶδος ‘species, kind, article’. This element is semantically linked to the 
concept of SEEING (past tense form εἶδ(ον) ‘saw’ that serves as the past of ὁράω ‘see’). 
The broadened role contributes to the classification of the entities between central and 
peripheral categories. The word εἶδος ‘species, kind, article’ constructs adjectives with the 
meaning ‘one who resembles in form, shape, texture’. It is a transfer from ΒΛΕΠΩ ‘literally 
see’ in the real world (more accessible) and which we perceive it through our senses 
much better than ΕΚΤΙΜΩ ‘I estimate that something is like something else’. This transfer 
helps evoke the world of thought (less accessible). In such a way European languages 
borrowed in the form -oid/-oidal, Fr -oïde/-oïdal in many scientific vocabularies, such as in 
medicine, biology, chemistry, physics, geometry, zoology, botany, mineralogy, 
psychology, anthropology, biochemistry, e.g. γεωειδής ‘geoid’, ελικοειδής ‘helicoïdal’ (Fr.), 
ελλειψοειδής ‘ellipsoid’, ημιτονοειδής ‘sinusoidal’, καρδιοειδής ‘cardioid’, παραβολοειδής 
‘paraboloid/ paraboloïde’, σιγμοειδής ‘sigmoid’, σωληνοειδής ‘solenoid’, τραπεζοειδής 
‘trapezoidal’, υπερβολοειδής ‘hyperboloidal’. 
Although there are no longer native speakers of AG, it continues to live through scientific 
terminology, and is an inexhaustible source for creating new terms and enriching the 
vocabulary of Greek and European languages, a fact which contributes to the scientific 
mutual understanding of the scientists of different countries since the cognates are used 
in the understanding of scientific texts and facilitates the teaching of terminology and 
generally of European languages and European culture. The borrowing of AG by 
European languages happened at a time when these languages had limited vocabularies 
when compared with AG and this continues to this day, while for centuries now they have 
contained linguistic wealth, because European languages not only borrowed words but 
also combining forms, prefixes, suffixes and above all Terms Formation Rules. 
For this reason we bring to the forefront again our proposal for teaching to the scientific 
world of the European Union and also at a global level those elements of Greek used in 
academic/scientific discourse, i.e. combining forms, prefixes and suffixes, and Terms 
Formation Rules. Doing so will allow scientists to take a first step towards understanding 
the deeper scientific discourse in their mother tongue and also in many other languages, 
and then in a second stage to produce accurate terminology. If this proposal is 
implemented, terminology as a cultural option could substantially contribute to building the 
identity of scientists and particularly the European scientific identity and the 
democratization of knowledge. 
AG = Ancient Greek. 
l.u. = lexical unit. 
