SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/10th%20Conference/Papers-and-speakers/10th_18-02-05_DoikasSpyros_paper_V03.pdf

ΕΛΕΤΟ – 10ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 12-14 Νοεμβρίου 2015 
270 
18    Lexicalizing the Forum 
    
Spiros Doikas 
ABSTRACT 
Translators' websites with terminology modules, as well as translation fora, have been important tools of 
the trade for translators in providing assistance with terminology queries.  
It is to be noted, that a terminology module is substantially different to a forum, and any forum script, if 
not heavily modified, is hardly the optimum medium for asking, answering and searching terminology. 
To that end, a Greek forum based on SMF (an open-source forum script), was developed and modified 
over the years specifically to serve the above purpose. Various aspects of that customisation effort will 
be discussed here, such as: 
Rules 
Rules regarding not only user behaviour but the recommended way of posting and answering 
terminological queries. 
Modifications of the SMF forum software 
Php modifications—increase the number of characters for the subject field; multiple changes needed in 
various files; use URL trimming for improved display of long URLs; provide a Google BBC button to 
easily create search queries.  
MySQL modifications—increase the number of characters for the subject field and optimise database. 
Specific “mods” — “mods” are code modifications posted by users that provide new functionality or 
enhance an existing functionality and are available via the SMF site’s “Mods” section). 
Search enhancement—there is Search enhancement mod, which has some bugs, and a custom mod 
which was developed to replicate part of that functionality. 
Style guide 
Rules for the submission of terminology questions and their editing by a moderator/user once the 
translation has been finalised. 
Rules for delimiters/initialisms. 
Maintenance of entries 
Duplicates removal, adding translations to entries, fixing case (different rules for different languages, i.e. 
in French in names of organisations only first letter should be capital), initialisms, delimiters. 
Mass export, import and update of terms—using php scripts and MySQL commands to export and then 
manipulate in Excel. 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 10ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 12-14 Νοεμβρίου 2015 
271 
Λεξικοποιώντας το φόρουμ 
    
Σπύρος Δόικας 
ΠΕΡΙΛΗΨΗ 
Οι ιστότοποι μεταφραστών με ορολογικές υπομονάδες, καθώς και τα μεταφραστικά φόρα, είναι 
σημαντικά εργαλεία για τους μεταφραστές, παρέχοντάς τους βοήθεια σε ερωτήματα ορολογίας. 
Ωστόσο, πρέπει να σημειωθεί ότι μια υπομονάδα ορολογίας διαφέρει σημαντικά από ένα φόρουμ, και 
ένα φόρουμ, αν δεν υποστεί σημαντικές τροποποιήσεις, δεν είναι το ιδανικότερο μέσο για ερωτήσεις, 
απαντήσεις και αναζητήσεις όρων. 
Για τον σκοπό αυτό, αναπτύχθηκε και τροποποιήθηκε ένα ελληνικό φόρουμ με βάση το SMF (ένα 
λογισμικό φόρουμ ανοιχτού κώδικα). Αναλύονται διάφορες πτυχές αυτής της προσπάθειας 
προσαρμογής, όπως: 
Κανόνες 
Κανόνες που δεν αφορούν μόνο τη συμπεριφορά των χρηστών αλλά και ο ενδεδειγμένος τρόπος 
δημοσίευσης και απάντησης ορολογικών ερωτημάτων. 
Τροποποιήσεις του λογισμικού SMF 
Τροποποιήσεις php – Αύξηση του αριθμού των χαρακτήρων για το πεδίο του θέματος (απαιτούνται 
πολλές αλλαγές σε διάφορα αρχεία)· λειτουργία περικοπής URL (μέσω αλλαγής κώδικα CSS) για 
βελτιωμένη εμφάνιση μεγάλων σε μήκος διευθύνσεων URL· κουμπί «Google» για εύκολη δημιουργία 
αναζητήσεων. 
Τροποποιήσεις MySQL – Αύξηση του αριθμού των χαρακτήρων για το πεδίο του θέματος και τη 
βελτιστοποίηση της βάσης δεδομένων. 
SMF Mods – Τροποποιήσεις πηγαίου κώδικα του προγράμματος που αναρτώντα σε μορφή «πακέτων» 
από τους χρήστες και παρέχουν νέα λειτουργικότητα ή τροποποιούν μια υφιστάμενη λειτουργικότητα 
του SMF και είναι διαθέσιμα μέσω του τμήματος «Mods» της ιστοσελίδας). 
Βελτίωση αναζήτησης – Υπάρχει διαθέσιμο ένα «Mod» με τίτλο «Search Enhancement», το οποίο έχει 
κάποια προγραμματιστικά σφάλματα. Ως εκ τούτου, αναπτύχθηκε μια προσαρμοσμένη λειτουργία, η 
οποία αναπαράγει μέρος αυτής της λειτουργικότητας. 
Χρήσιμες λειτουργίες του SMF 
Υπάρχουν κάποιες λειτουργίες του SMF που βοηθούν ιδιαίτερα την επεξεργασία όρων. Ένα 
παράδειγμα είναι η δυνατότητα γρήγορης επεξεργασίας (που μπορεί να εφαρμοστεί τόσο σε προβολή 
θέματος όσο και σε προβολή πίνακα). Η γρήγορη επεξεργασία δίνει τη δυνατότητα επεξεργασίας χωρίς 
να χρειάζεται να γίνει φόρτωση νέας σελίδας. Σε προβολή πίνακα δίνει τη δυνατότητα γρήγορης 
διόρθωσης πολλών θεμάτων (αντίστοιχες διορθώσεις, π.χ. σε λογισμικό Mediawiki, το οποίο θεωρείται 
μια ενδεδειγμένη λύση ηλεκτρονικής-συνεργατικής λεξικογραφίας, θα απαιτούσαν πολύ περισσότερο 
χρόνο). 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 10ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 12-14 Νοεμβρίου 2015 
272 
Οδηγός ύφους 
Οδηγίες σχετικά με την υποβολή ερωτήσεων ορολογίας και την επεξεργασία τους από τον 
συντονιστή/ερωτώντα άπαξ και η μετάφραση έχει οριστικοποιηθεί. 
Οδηγίες για οριοθέτες. Με το σκεπτικό ότι κάποια στιγμή θα γίνει εξαγωγή των όρων διαμορφώθηκαν 
κάποιες οδηγίες που θα διευκολύνουν την επεξεργασία τους. Για παράδειγμα ως οριοθέτης μεταξύ του 
όρου και των αποδόσεων έχουν οριστεί οι χαρακτήρες « -> ». Σε περίπτωση όμως που έστω και μία 
απόδοση εμπεριέχει το κόμμα ως μέρος της, τότε χρησιμοποιείται ως οριοθέτης το « –> », δηλαδή το 
en-dash (αντί του ενωτικού της προηγούμενης περίπτωσης) και το σύμβολο «μεγαλύτερο από». Ως 
οριοθέτης μεταξύ των αποδόσεων έχει οριστεί το κόμμα. Σε περίπτωση όμως που έστω και μία 
απόδοση εμπεριέχει το κόμμα ως μέρος της, τότε χρησιμοποιείται ως οριοθέτης το σύμβολο «|». 
Οδηγίες για αρκτικόλεξα. Τα αρκτικόλεξα παρατίθενται μετά τον ανεπτυγμένο όρο σε παρένθεση (αν 
υπάρχει πάνω από ένα, διαχωρίζονται με κόμμα). Δεν χρησιμοποιούνται τελείες. Αποφεύγεται η χρήση 
αρκτικόλεξων που δεν ανήκουν στη γλώσσα του όρου  καθώς και όσων αντικατοπτρίζουν μέρος του 
όρου. 
Μαζική συντήρηση λημματολογίου  
Κατάργηση διπλοτύπων, προσθήκη αποδόσεων, διόρθωση πεζοκεφαλαίων (υπάρχουν διαφορετικοί 
κανόνες για κάθε γλώσσα, π.χ. για τα ονόματα οργανισμών στα γαλλικά το πρώτο γράμμα είναι 
κεφαλαίο και τα υπόλοιπα πεζά), αρκτικόλεξα, οριοθέτες. 
Μαζική εξαγωγή, εισαγωγή και ενημέρωση των όρων τόσο μέσω λειτουργιών που έχουν αναπτυχθεί σε 
κώδικα  PHP όσο και με χρήση εντολών MySQL για περαιτέρω επεξεργασία στο Excel. 
 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 10ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 12-14 Νοεμβρίου 2015 
273 
0   Introduction 
Translators' websites with terminology modules, as well as translation fora, have been 
important tools of the trade for translators.  
Early web-based forums date back as far as 19941. However, they really took off from 2000 
onwards. VBulletin, YaBB2 and phpBB appeared in the year 2000. The first SMF version, 
SMF 1.0 Beta 1a, was released on September 30, 20033. When it comes to translators’ 
websites with terminology modules, ProZ.com was launched in 1999 and TranslatorsCafe 
in August 1, 2002. 
It is to be noted, that a terminology module is substantially different to a forum; therefore, 
any forum script, if not heavily modified, is hardly the optimum medium for asking, answering 
and searching terminology. 
To that end, a Greek forum based on SMF4 (Simple Machines Forum), was developed and 
modified over the years specifically to serve the above purpose. 
What follows is a brief exploration of the difficulties presented and the steps taken, as well 
as what was done differently in comparison to an ordinary forum. 
1   Forum rules 
Almost every forum has a page with rules prominently displayed. Rules ensure the smooth 
functioning of the forum and describe what is allowed and what is not. 
Apart from the typical forum rules5, like the ones dealing with advertising, spam, double 
posting, overquoting (i.e. not quoting a full post in the reply immediately after it), using the 
modify button to edit a post rather than posting below and thus cluttering the forum, flaming 
and staying on topic; there are rules which are specific to a terminology forum. For example:  
• 
limiting a translation query to 12 words 
• 
creating new topics for different terms 
• 
avoiding greeklish 
• 
using proper accents, punctuation marks (i.e. do not use English question mark in 
Greek text) and capitalization 
                                                           
1  
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_forum 
2  
The precursor of SMF which was written in Perl.  
3  
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simple_Machines_Forum 
4  
http://www.simplemachines.org 
5  
http://www.translatum.gr/forum/index.php?topic=35.0 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 10ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 12-14 Νοεμβρίου 2015 
274 
• 
the query should be entered in the subject field in lowercase, unless grammar 
demands a capital (i.e. "Greek" and not "greek"). 
• 
a query should not be in quotation marks or be preceded with notes like “please 
help with a translation”, etc. 
In addition to the above, there is a number of other “rules” which are more aptly expounded 
in the “Style guide” section. 
1.1   Moderators 
Responsible for enforcing the forum rules are the (per board and global) moderators. 
Moderators can edit posts only in the boards they moderate. Global moderators can edit any 
post throughout the forum. The role of the moderators is extremely important as they are the 
final “authorities” who decide on the appropriate translations by adding and removing them. 
The role of the moderator at times can verge on the role of a wiki editor, as there is an 
understanding between moderators who are actively engaged in posting terminology, that 
other moderators may edit their posts and correct mistakes and typos or even add and 
remove translations. 
2   Modification of SMF forum software 
2.1   Php modifications 
Php modifications are the most numerous. One of the most important modifications is 
increasing the subject field length (number of characters allowed). In order to ensure that, 
multiple changes had to be implemented in various files as well as in the subject field of the 
smf_messages MySQL table (see “MySQL modifications” below). 
2.2   MySQL modifications 
The use of UTF-8 is a very important issue in a multilingual forum. Although widely adopted 
in modern fora and CMS systems, during the first days of Translatum forum (i.e. SMF 1), 
UTF-8 was not officially supported. The disadvantage of this was that multibyte characters 
were saved and displayed as html mumerical entities, thus increasing database size and 
providing poorer search results. In order to remedy this, the database (in ASCII format) was 
exported and converted to UTF-8, and then reimported. Some issues appeared as the result 
of this, i.e. broken characters in certain parts of the forum. Full compatibility with UTF-8 was 
achieved with SMF 2. 
The length of the subject field is extremely important as it affects the length of the 
terminological entry. The default is subject varchar(255) and it was increased to 
varchar(600). The limit of varchar is 65,535 bytes but it is not advisable to have a very high 
value as it could affect database performance. In previous SMF versions (1 and 1.1) this 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 10ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 12-14 Νοεμβρίου 2015 
275 
field was tinytext with a limit of 255 bytes. 
 
2.3   Mods 
Modifications or “mods” as they are known, are code packages which can extent or alter 
forum functionality and can be downloaded from the SMF Modifications list6. They 
change/add/remove the original source code by means of find/replace or add and remove 
operations. These are some of the mods installed: 
1. 
Recent Topics On Board Index (the standard functionality is to display recent posts, 
thus possibly cluttering the forum “Info Center” with the same topic and its replies). 
2. 
Share This Topic (a functionality for Facebook, Twitter and Google+ sharing) 
3. 
Simple Audio Video Embedder (in order to autoembed youtube and other videos) 
4. 
Smart Pagination 
5. 
SMF4Mobile Mod (providing mobile functionality) 
6. 
SMFPacks: SEO Pro Mod 
7. 
Stop Spammer 
8. 
TopicRenamer 
9. 
WYSIWYG Quick Reply 
Some of the modifications though were custom-made specifically for Translatum forum. 
2.3.1   Search enhancement 
There is Search enhancement mod, which has a some important bugs, like not functioning 
correctly when at least one of the returned results contains an apostrophe7, and a custom 
mod which was developed to party emulate its behaviour. 
Usually, search results appear in an expanded style in a forum, containing text from the 
subject as well as the body of the post. This is hardly ideal for a terminological search, 
where one needs to see relevant results quickly and succinctly. To this end, a “result 
                                                           
6  
http://custom.simplemachines.org/mods/ 
7  
http://www.simplemachines.org/community/index.php?topic=188513.msg3457985#msg3457985 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 10ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 12-14 Νοεμβρίου 2015 
276 
summary” is displayed with the topic subjects only and the search term in yellow highlight. 
As subjects contain the term and its translation(s), the required level of succinctness is 
achieved. 
 
Another point is the way search results are ordered. By default, in fora, recent posts have a 
much higher “weight”. However, since this parameter is hardly of any importance when it 
comes to terminological data, the weights have been adapted with emphasis on the weight 
for a matching subject. 
 
 
2.3.2   Google button 
One of the commonest ways to verify a linguistic hypothesis, especially when it is in a 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 10ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 12-14 Νοεμβρίου 2015 
277 
language which is not our mother tongue, is to use a Google search with that specific 
phrase. Normally, one would have to perform the Google search (using quotation marks if it 
is a phrase search), and then paste the (long) URL in the forum. However, this is a copious 
procedure given its high frequency. 
A typical feature of a forum is BBC buttons (Bulletin Board Code8) which is a way to easily 
add formatting tags in a non-WYSIWYG environment. A custom mod was developed which 
adds a Google button to the available BBC buttons when a user posts. The functionality is 
simple: select the word or phrase and click the button. This will automatically create a 
[google]Google search[/google] for that word or phrase (in bold the actual tags). To 
enforce phrase search, one has to add first quotation marks to that phrase. 
2.3.3   URL trimming 
Given that long URLs are often pasted in the forum, if no trimming was applied, the 
readability of many posts would decrease. To that end, a CSS-only mod was developed that 
would trim long URLs. The benefit of this approach, instead of affecting the actual code that 
produces the output, is that it does not add any delay and when URLs are copied from the 
forum, the full URL is pasted. 
2.4   Server modifications 
Due to the inherent limitations and performance and speed of MySQL search, a server-
based approach is recommended for large fora (i.e. fora with more than 750,000 posts). 
Sphinx9 search engine is supported by SMF, provided that the forum is hosted at the very 
least in a virtual private server10 (VPS), and it is being considered for a future 
implementation on Translatum forum11. 
3   Handy SMF features 
As I mentioned in the Introduction, a forum is hardly the ideal medium for terminology 
management. However, there are certain SMF features that often missing from such 
dedicated terminology management environments. 
                                                           
8  
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BBCode 
9  
http://sphinxsearch.com 
10  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_private_server 
11  A similar search tool, Lucene, is already in use for Translatum’s wikis. Refer to the paper “Όταν το 
LSJ γνώρισε τη Βίκυ”, 9th Hellenic Language and Terminology Conference, 2013 
(http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/9th%20Conference/Papers-and-speakers/9th_23-05-
01_DoikasSpyros_Paper_V05.pdf).  
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 10ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 12-14 Νοεμβρίου 2015 
278 
One of the most important feature is inline editing. Inline editing, using Ajax12 technology, 
allows the user to click on editable element on the page and edit it in-place (that is without 
having to wait for a new page to load). This functionality is implemented in SMF’s board 
index where all the topics are listed one below the other. By double clicking in the box that 
contains the text (not in the text itself), the text becomes editable. Then one can make the 
desired changes, and save by clicking outside the box. This feature allows the quick editing 
of multiple entries and the workflow is extremely fast, i.e. if compared to a wiki workflow. If 
inline editing was implemented in search results, then it would have been even more useful. 
 
4   Style guide 
Below is the style guide governing the submission of terminology questions and their editing 
by a moderator/user once the translation has been finalised. 
4.1   Delimiters 
Delimiters are important for future processing of terns. 
Normally, the source/target delimiter is “->” (hyphen plus greater-than sign) and the 
translations delimiter is the comma “,”. However, there are some exceptions. 
Multiple translations are normally separated by a comma. In case one of the proposed 
translations includes a comma, then the vertical bar is used in all translations (“|”) as 
translation delimiter.  (Not necessary in case, for example, of translations including "ό,τι", as 
there is no space after the comma). 
Another way (complimentary to the aforementioned or to be used when there is only one 
translation and hence, not possible to use the pipe translation delimiter) to filter this out is to 
use an n-dash plus greater-than sign (–>) instead of hyphen plus greater-than sign as 
source/target separator. This is a way of pointing out some non-standard usage to the 
person who will do the term filtering. I.e. in the following example entering a vertical bar is 
                                                           
12  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ajax_(programming) 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 10ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 12-14 Νοεμβρίου 2015 
279 
irrelevant (one source term, one translation): 
Terms (source text) which include a comma is another way of filtering entries which do not 
abide to the comma separator rule. Hence, there should never be two terms in the source 
segment, but either broken in two topics of the specific language pair, or reverse the 
language pair, if the equivalent translation is only one term. For example, instead of: 
foot, leg -> πόδι [in English-Greek pair] 
use 
πόδι -> foot, leg [in Greek-English pair] 
When the poster has an idea about possible translation(s), then it should be entered in the 
subject, after the term. I.e. 
βαθμολογική εξέλιξη -> promotion in grade, grade advancement; 
Full translations of the terms should be used rather than parts of the term in parenthesis. I.e. 
instead of: 
βαθμολογική εξέλιξη -> (grade) advancement 
use 
βαθμολογική εξέλιξη -> advancement, grade advancement 
4.2   Special use of Greek question mark 
When the subject ends with a Greek question mark (;) then it is an indication that the 
translations given are not reliable or that they are tentative. The Greek question mark is also 
used to indicate a question, when one enters one or more possible translation equivalents, 
to assist the answerers. The Greek question mark is not necessary when only the source 
term is entered. Similarly, use only the Greek question mark to indicate this and not the 
English one. 
Do not use a question mark (Greek or English) for finalised translations (resolved 
questions), even if the phrase is a question, as the question mark will be used to filter out all 
inconclusive translations. 
Also, appropriate spacing should be used. For example, there is no space before comma 
and there is always ONE space after the comma (unless the comma is a decimal separator). 
 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 10ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 12-14 Νοεμβρίου 2015 
280 
4.3   Initialisms 
Initialisms:13  
1. 
Are used only when they are accepted initialisms of the term language  
2. 
May contain a combination of upper and lower case letters (i.e. mRNA) 
3. 
Fullstops are to be avoided (i.e. “ΟΤΕ” rather than “Ο.Τ.Ε.”) 
4. 
When initialisms contain (capital) letters which can be typed in Greek or English 
with the same visual effect, we make sure we use the term language 
5. 
When there are two or more initialisms, they are separated with a comma, i.e. 
Reverend (Revd, Rev.) 
6. 
When initialisms are not representative of the full term, but only of a part thereof, 
then they better be avoided. For example in “radiografia toracica postero-anteriore 
(PA) -> οπισθοπρόσθια ακτινογραφία θώρακα”, “PA” is an initialisms for “postero-
anteriore” and not the full term. 
7. 
The initialisms are listed with their expansions. The expansion comes first and then 
the initialisms follow in parenthesis. 
8. 
The use of parenthesis is strictly for initialisms and other uses are discouraged (i.e. 
part of speech, register, linguistic variant, etc). 
5   Import, export, update and maintain entries 
5.1   Import 
Entries can be edited and prepared offline and then posted one by one manually. However, 
this is time-consuming. To attend to this need, an import script has been developed which 
required a 4 or 5 column tab-delimited format. The columns are 1) username 2) subject 3) 
body 4) user ID and, optionally, 5) board ID. In other words each term can be imported on a 
different board on the basis of the board ID contained in column 5. 
To run this script, a cron job (scheduled task) has to be created and configured to run on set 
times and intervals. “Sleep” functionality has been added to the script to make it look as if it 
was posted by a human by randomly delaying the posting time of each term based on a 
given delay range. 
5.2   Export and mass editing 
As the number of term grew in the forum, a number of issues started to affect it. One of the 
most important being duplicates. Mass editing involves exporting the database to a tab-
delimited format and then performing a number maintenance tasks like removing duplicates, 
                                                           
13  http://www.translatum.gr/forum/index.php?topic=218935.msg415559#msg415559 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 10ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 12-14 Νοεμβρίου 2015 
281 
adding translations to entries, case fixing (different rules for different languages, i.e. in 
French in names of organisations only the first letter should be capital).  
To export the terms a MySQL query is used that provides a csv export with poster ID, 
subject, topic ID and board ID.  
5.3   Excel manipulations  
In order to process the terms in Excel, a number of tasks has to be performed. 
1. 
import the csv export (mentioned in previous section) into Excel14 
2. 
normalise apostrophe variants (like &#39; and &#039;) to a standard symbol  
3. 
replace the "->" and "–>" delimiter with a tab character 
4. 
delete duplicate and leading/trailing spaces (using ASAP Utilities) 
5. 
create an extra column with source text (optionally, separate initialisms found in 
parentheses in an extra column in order to locate duplicates with or without the 
initialism) 
6. 
change all text of that column to lowercase (and, in languages like French for 
example, remove all accents in order to identify errors in accent usage) 
7. 
use a duplicate manager like Duplicate Master15 to colour duplicate cells of that 
column 
8. 
use Excel filter functionality to sort on coloured cells 
At this stage the duplicates have been identified and the second stage deals with actions 
directly on the forum. 
5.4   Forum manipulations 
The following courses of action can be taken for forum duplicates: 
1. 
Reverse the entry (i.e. change "car -> αυτοκίνητο" to "αυτοκίνητο -> car") and 
reverse the language pair (by moving to the reverse language pair board). This 
implies that it has been confirmed that there is no such entry in the other board (i.e. 
"αυτοκίνητο"). 
2. 
If there is already an entry in the reverse language pair board, then change one of 
the pairs and move to a different board altogether. I.e. if "αυτοκίνητο" already exists 
in Greek>English then move to Italian>Greek as "auto -> αυτοκίνητο". An easier 
workflow would be to first reverse the language pairs of topics, en masse, and 
when that is done, sort on Subject and, if the languages use different alphabets, 
                                                           
14  Since Excel fails to convert UTF-8 as exported from phpMyAdmin, I had to use the following regex 
pairs to manually convert to tsv: Find: ";" Replace: \t Find: "\n" Replace:\n 
15  http://www.translatum.gr/forum/index.php?topic=49093.0 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 10ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 12-14 Νοεμβρίου 2015 
282 
then it would be easy to select them via check boxes in board index and move 
them en masse to the reverse pair board. 
3. 
When two or more duplicate entries have a lot of replies, then it is a good idea to 
simply merge them, so that people in the future get more out of the topic. When 
merging, the subject should be amended in order to contain all the translations 
available in both topics. The down side of merging is that the newest topic ID(s), 
when accessed via the Internet, will display an error page (since the topic no longer 
exists). Merging can be done either by selecting the check boxes after a search, or 
by adding the topic ID of the topic to be merged. 
4. 
Another possibility is to change from singular to plural or vice versa. 
5.5   Mass updating 
Sometimes one needs to merge translations from an offline glossary with the forum 
contents. The first step in order to do that is to follow the procedure described in “Excel 
Manipulations”. Then: 
1. 
replace the translations delimiter with “|” 
2. 
add in the same spreadsheet the offline glossary, following the same delimiter 
conventions 
3. 
Sort the spreadsheet on source column 
4. 
run a bespoke macro which will merge duplicates, add extra translations if they 
exist, while maintaining the topic ID in the last column 
5. 
merge source and target column16 ending up with a spreadsheet with a subject 
column and a topic ID column. 
6. 
save as UTF-8 tab-delimited text 
7. 
upload to server 
8. 
run a bespoke php script which batch updates the subjects of the topics listed in the 
txt file. 
 
6   Conclusion 
We have seen from the foregoing that a great deal of custom work has gone into making 
SMF more amenable to terminological use. That does not mean that there is no space for 
improvement. Much more can be done. For example, implement server-level Sphinx search 
                                                           
16  I.e. by using ASAP Utilities’ “Merge column data” option. 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 10ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 12-14 Νοεμβρίου 2015 
283 
to increase search speed, provide autocomplete and correction suggestions functionality17; 
enable inline editing in search results; overhaul the way subjects are stored in database 
level to allow for source and target fields and thus a higher degree of flexibility in search 
output; provide a user interface for the export of terminology subsets in csv, xml or 
MultiTerm xml format. 
Ultimately, the terminological data contained in the forum will be exported, revised and 
merged with other data and be made available in a terminological platform like mediawiki. 
However, the numerous discussions that have taken place in the forum should by no means 
be considered as a useless trouble; they play a major role in highlighting potential pitfalls 
and determining the preferred translations. In that sense, a terminological forum can be 
considered a workshop in applied translation, providing valuable insights into the hidden 
depths of the translation process and opportunities for creative synthesis of apparently 
discordant views. 
 
 
Spiros Doikas 
http://translatum.gr/cv.htm 
 
 
 
                                                           
17  See: http://sphinxsearch.com/blog/2013/05/21/simple-autocomplete-and-correction-suggestion/. 
Autocomplete functionality is provided on the subject when creating/editing a post with the use of a 
the “Related Topics” and “Similar Topics” mods (Nos 189 and 3473 respectively). However, these 
mods are not compatible with Sphinx and they were not used in the forum given the plans to 
implement Sphinx in the future. 
