SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/12th%20Conference/HeLaTerm2019_Call-for-Papers_EN.pdf

ELETO 
ΕΛΛΗΝΙΚΗ ΕΤΑΙΡΕΙΑ ΟΡΟΛΟΓΙΑΣ 
HELLENIC SOCIETY FOR TERMINOLOGY 
Syngrou Av. 63, 11745 ATHENS GREECE 
Tel.: +30 210 8662069, +30 6974321009, +30 6949573108 
E-mail.: valeonti@otenet.gr  
Website: www.eleto.gr  
 
 
12th Conference  
“Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
7–9 November, 2019 – Athens, GREECE 
Dedicated to Hippocrates 
Call for papers 
The Hellenic Society for Terminology (ELETO) in cooperation with the University of Athens (UOA), the Aristotle 
University of Thessaloniki (AUTH), the University of Cyprus, the Technical Chamber of Greece (TCG), the 
Hellenic Organization for Standardization (ELOT), the Organization for the Promotion of the Hellenic Language 
and other organizations, which will be announced on the relevant web page, organize the 12th Conference 
“Hellenic Language and Terminology”. The conference will be held in Athens, Greece, on 7–9 November 
2019. 
The aim of the Conference is to present the current situation of the Greek language from a terminological point 
of view, as well as methods, practices and tools of Terminology science, and their application in the Greek 
language environment – monolingual and/or interlingual –, with a view to promote terminological research and 
contribute to the present-day terminological enrichment of the Greek language. 
Themes of the Conference: 
1 
Linguistic–ontological principles of terminology 
Principles and methods of language and logic adopted, formulated and applied in terminology. Terminology as the 
interface between language and knowledge. Methods, mechanisms and rules of naming resulted from intra-lingual 
or interlingual study of designations (terms and names) and definitions of concepts. Theoretical, synchronic and/or 
diachronic examination of terms in monolingual and/or multilingual environment. 
2 
Didactics and terminology 
Didactics of terminology. Undergraduate and postgraduate lessons and/or seminars in terminology. Learning issues 
in terminology. Terminological aspects of teaching lessons in specific subject fields. Concepts and terms of 
didactics. 
3 
Terminology in specific subject fields – Lexicographical and terminographical studies 
Synchronic and/or diachronic consideration of terminologies and terminology problems in specific subject fields. 
Systems of terms in specific subject fields in relation to corresponding concept systems. Lexicographical and 
terminographical studies in specific subject fields. 
4 
Terminological resources 
Special monolingual or multilingual dictionaries, printed or electronic, local or on line / on the Internet. Term 
collections, or term bases containing designations, concept definitions and other terminological information. Special 
corpora offered for research and support of terminological resources. Application of new technologies in terminology 
practice and in terminology services provision. 
5 
Standardization of terminology 
Intralingual validation and standardization of terms by determining preferred and admitted terms as valid terms. 
internationalization of concepts, and interlingual correspondence, validation and standardization of equivalent 
terms. Term proposals for validation and standardization. Standardization of special language texts. 
6 
Terminology and translation 
The role of terms in translation theory and practice. Application of terminology principles in translation. Concept-
oriented interlingual correspondence and “equivalence” of terms between an original and its translation versus 
word-oriented “translation” of terms. Translation assisted by Internet terminological resources. Concepts and terms 
of translation studies. 
7 
Dissemination and use of terms – Terminology policies and regulation 
Ways and means for disseminating special terms and terminologies. Intra-field and inter-field matters of terminology 
information. Regulatory tools of terminology policy (publications, laws, specifications, standards). 
 
 
E 
Λ  
Ε  Τ  Ο 
L 
E
2 
 
8 
Activities of organizations and bodies for terminology 
Activities for production, collection, processing, publication and provision of terms and terminology services by 
national, regional, and/or international bodies (organizations, companies, associations, committees, groups). 
Terminology events organization. 
 
 
Languages: 
Official languages of the Conference will be Greek and English. 
Critical dates: 
Submission of abstracts by  
30 March 2019 
Approval of abstracts by  
30 April 2019 
Submission of full papers by  
30 June 2019 
Abstracts and papers: 
Participants wishing to present a paper at the Conference are invited to submit an abstract in two electronic 
copies, as .doc files compatible with MS Office 97-2003. The abstract should be written in one of the official 
languages of the Conference and should neither be less than 200 words nor exceed 300 words.  
The following items must appear on the page of one copy of the abstract: 
a) title, place and dates of the Conference: 12th Conference “Hellenic Language and Terminology”, 
Athens, Greece, 7–9 November, 2019 
b) title of the paper  
c) the themes (see above) the paper comes under and 
d) name, title/profession, full address, tel. no / fax no, and e-mail address of the author(s). 
On the other copy only a), b) and c) should be written. 
The two files should be sent by e-mail, as attached files, to: valeonti@otenet.gr  
Following the examination of the abstracts by the Scientific Committee of the Conference, the authors of the 
selected papers will receive the necessary information for the preparation of the full texts of their papers. 
 
Information: 
Conference Secretariat: tel. +30 210 7245534, e-mail: tsiamasge54@outlook.com.gr  
Organizing Committee: tel. +30 6974321009, e-mail: valeonti@otenet.gr  
Website: http://www.eleto.gr/en/Conference12.html  
