SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/10th%20Conference/Papers-and-speakers/10th_27-26-35_RoukensJan_V02.pdf

ELETO – 10th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, Greece, 12–14 November 2015 
386 
 
27    Reflections about a European Culture Union 
    
Jan Roukens 
 (The Heads of State, signatories of the Treaty)……… desiring 
to deepen the solidarity between their peoples while respecting 
their history, their culture and their traditions……… 
(Preamble of the Treaty of Rome and later Treaties1): 
The founders of Europe had a vision 
The unthinkable: the Dutch language being replaced by English. It may still take some time, 
but it may happen. And Swedish and German in the North or even Greek and some Roman 
languages in the South, undergoing the same fate. It has happened before in modern 
Europe, although the circumstances were different: Irish was under colonial British rule 
when the transition happened. In 21st century Europe rulers having the power to tell a 
population what language to speak or not to speak do not exist anymore. A great 
achievement.  
But the same effects may be achieved with other means. Not the mighty power imposing 
from above, but by an organised implosion. A diffuse though strong force that is hardly 
visible because it acts in smallish ways in many places in parallel. Imagine a dike built to 
prevent water flooding the city or the land. The water is intelligent; it has no chance if it 
attacks over the dike, so it decides to seep in from below in a multitude of places. After a 
while, unless the defenders stay alert and take countermeasures, the dike implodes and the 
water flows freely.  
In most European countries such processes are on the way. Sometimes dangerously slowly, 
in other countries leapwise such as in the Netherlands where up to date scientific and 
technical Dutch have disappeared2 in the relatively short period of 15 years. In other smaller 
domains the language has collapsed as well or is at the brink of falling.  
The scenario evolves more or less as follows:  
                                                           
1   The 
text 
of 
the 
European 
Treaties 
can 
be 
found 
here 
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/ 
collection/eu-law/treaties.html 
2  With some exceptions, such as parts of clinical medicine, and Dutch law. Obviously, scientific 
language used until, say, year 2000, is still available and documented, but not spoken by the 
younger generations 
ELETO – 10th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, Greece, 12–14 November 2015 
387 
 
- 
the white collar employees in multinational companies adopt bilingual or English-only 
policies;  
- 
higher education institutions adopt internationalisation policies, implying that English 
is used to ‘open up’ to the world;  
- 
small and medium-sized commercial and semi-commercial activities aimed at 
national and international clients turn to English because it is cumbersome an costly 
to communicate in two or more languages;  
- 
governments and their administrations adopt bilingualism because a small but 
growing number of citizens use ‘another’ language daily;  
- 
primary and secondary schools prepare the next generation citizens for a world that 
will be using English whenever the national languages fail to serve communication 
needs; and as the universities use English, it is logical to anticipate demands from 
the universities. 
The transitional period, from the time that the majority of citizens speak their own language 
until the time that they have become bilingual or monolingual English, may take several 
decades. During this period the language proficiency will vary considerably between 
citizens; and only few citizens will command the native language or the English language 
fully. This has a negative impact on the quality of our societies and will cause social unrest.  
It is in the interest of Europe and the Europeans that this scenario will not materialise.  
Culture and Language 
This is a paper about culture, why does it start with language?  
Culture is a palace with many halls and chambers. The great reception hall is reserved for 
language; it is probably the most prominent aspect of culture. Language moreover is rather 
well documented and ‘visible’ for almost all people. The previous paragraphs have shown in 
a nutshell how languages may decline. Similarly the cultural phenomena in the other halls 
and chambers of the culture palace may implode or are washed away. 
The culture concept is broad and deep. It embraces all human efforts to make life with 
fellow-humans and with the natural environment possible and attractive. Cultural 
achievements are men-made, in contrast to natural phenomena such as weather, materials, 
plants, mountains. 
ELETO – 10th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, Greece, 12–14 November 2015 
388 
There are many human beings. All these people live in different places in different 
circumstances, each bearing the traces of deep historical evolutions. In order to survive, 
humans live in groups with physical and cultural characteristics shared by the members of 
each group. Some prominent cultural characteristics are: speech and other methods of 
communication, clothing and housing, ways of acquiring and preparing food, rituals and 
rules of behaviour, manufacturing.   
 
The unfinished Treaty 
- 
The Community shall take cultural aspects into account in its action under other 
provisions of this Treaty 
(Treaty of Maastricht, 1992) 
The European Union (EU) was established in 1992 by the Treaty of Maastricht. The EU was 
preceded by the Coal and Steel Community (1951), by EURATOM (1957) and the European 
Economic Community (EEC, 1957). In 2015 the treaty in effect is the Treaty of Lisbon 
(2007), but with respect to culture there is no significant difference between ’Lisbon’ and 
‘Maastricht’. The absence of major differences is significant. It signals the lack of urgency 
with which cultural matters are handled. 
Economic and monetary policies have always been the day-to-day business of the Union, 
even if its origin was the political goal of ‘an ever closer cooperation of the peoples of 
Europe’ to overcome the divisions and the wars of the past. The Maastricht Treaty installed 
the Monetary Union and paved the way for the euro. The general public associates this 
treaty which was a major milestone in the political development of the EU, mainly with the 
introduction of the euro.  
It is hardly known today that the Maastricht Treaty also widened the scope of action of the 
EU by the addition of a Culture chapter. This chapter was short, as if it was added in the last 
minute. But although no specific actions of the EU were envisaged, it wasn’t merely 
symbolic. The most important goals from the Culture chapter are quoted above (italics). The 
Treaty of Lisbon copied the Culture Chapter of 1992, and failed to define in concrete terms 
what the EU should do in the culture sector. In Lisbon just one phrase was added to the text, 
providing somewhat more depth. Particularly the addition of the term ‘diversity’ is of 
importance:  
ELETO – 10th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, Greece, 12–14 November 2015 
389 
The Union shall (...) respect its rich cultural and linguistic diversity, and shall ensure that 
Europe's cultural heritage is safeguarded and enhanced. 
The diversity of Cultures in Europe  
The recent Greek crisis demonstrated that Greece and the Greek culture are not well known 
in many of the other 27 countries of the EU. The lack of knowledge did not prevent people in 
other countries to ventilate opinions about Greece and the Greeks. In this respect, Greece is 
no exception in the EU; only citizens of countries sharing a border have some knowledge off 
their neighbours and may even speak their language. 
This general lack of knowledge is disastrous for the cohesion of the Union and the solidarity 
between countries. If European citizens are asked to show solidarity with citizens of another 
member state, some basic understanding of the nature and ambitions of the other citizens is 
required. And if citizens are asked to add a European identity to their various national 
identities, they must have some idea who the other people are with whom they share their 
European identity. 
Moreover, citizens are asked to enjoy their membership of a culturally very rich Europe. That 
is true, but only a few Europeans appreciate how true the statement is. The motto ‘Unity and 
Diversity’ has been adopted by the EU as a slogan to present its ‘nature’ to the outside 
world. It is true, Europe is immensely rich culturally and the world should know. But the EU 
should make sure that this slogan is more than a phrase, that the 500 million citizens 
embody this slogan. 
 
The perspective of a Culture Union 
- 
The Community shall contribute to the flowering of the cultures of the Member 
States, while respecting their national and regional diversity and at the same time 
bringing the common cultural heritage to the fore 
(Treaty of Maastricht, 1992) 
 
It is timely to prepare for a wider perspective for the European Union than the predominant 
focus on economic and monetary matters. But be aware: this has been advocated since 50 
years. It may be difficult for an organisation as complex as the EU to update its list of 
ELETO – 10th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, Greece, 12–14 November 2015 
390 
priorities. But a more balanced set of policies will contribute to regaining credibility among 
the European citizens and nations. And most likely, among the countries outside Europe. 
The EU should therefore aim for the establishment of a European Culture Union capable of 
redressing the problems referred to above, and indeed, contributing to the flowering of the 
cultures of the European nations. 
 
Jan Roukens 
Board member of language and terminology organisations 
E-mail: jroukens@hotmail.com 
 
 
 
