SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/15th Conference/HeLaTerm2025_Call-for-Papers_EN.pdf

ELETO 
ΕΛΛΗΝΙΚΗ ΕΤΑΙΡΕΙΑ ΟΡΟΛΟΓΙΑΣ 
HELLENIC SOCIETY FOR TERMINOLOGY 
Syngrou Av. 63, 11745 Athens GREECE 
Tel.: +30 210 8662069, +30 6974321009, +30 6949573108 
E-mail.: valeonti@otenet.gr  
Website: www.eleto.gr  
 
15th Conference  
“Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
Athens, 6–8 November, 2025 
Dedicated to Panagiotis Kontos (1936–2024) 
Call for papers 
The Hellenic Society for Terminology (ELETO), co-organizes with the National and Kapodistrian University of 
Athens (NKUA), and with the support of institutions that will soon be announced on the Conference’s website, the 
15th Conference “Hellenic Language and Terminology”. The conference will be held in Athens, on 6–8 
November 2025. 
The aim of the Conference is to present the current situation of the Greek language from a terminological point of 
view, as well as methods, practices and tools of Terminology science, and their application in the Greek language 
environment – monolingual and/or interlingual –, with a view to promote terminological research and contribute to 
the present-day terminological enrichment of the Greek language. 
Themes of the Conference: 
1 
Theoretical and methodological approaches to terminology  
Linguistic-ontological principles of terminology. Terminology as an interface between language and knowledge. 
Methods, mechanisms and rules of naming. Theoretical, synchronic and/or diachronic examination of terms in 
monolingual and/or multilingual contexts. 
2 
Terminology and didactics 
Terminology teaching and terminology didactics. Terminological aspects of teaching lessons in specific subject fields. 
Concepts and terms of didactics. 
3 
Terminology in specific subject fields 
Synchronic and/or diachronic consideration of terminologies and terminology problems in specific subject fields. 
Systems of terms in specific subject fields in relation to corresponding concept systems. 
4 
Terminology and translation – interpretation 
The role of terms in the theory and practice of translation. Application of the principles of terminology in translation. 
Cross-linguistic matching and equivalence of terms. Concepts and terms of translation and interpretation studies. 
5 
Terminological resources and digital tools 
Dictionaries, terminological collections, term bases, corpora of specialized texts. Terminology management tools. 
Terminology and Artificial Intelligence (AI). 
6 
Standardization of terminology  
Validation and standardization of terms. Harmonization of concepts. Standardization of specific languages. Issues of 
simple and inclusive language. 
7 
Terminology policy - Activity of terminology institutions  
Production, collection, processing, publication and availability of terms and provision of terminology services. Ways 
and means of disseminating specific terms and terminologies. Terminology information issues. Regulatory tools for 
terminology policy. 
Languages: 
Official languages of the Conference are Greek and English. 
Important dates: 
Submission of abstracts by  
31 March 2025 
Acceptance notifications by  
23 May 2025 
Submission of full papers by  
20 July 2025 
Abstract submissions: 
Individuals wishing to present a paper at the Conference are invited to submit an extended abstract (800 – 1000 
words, excluding references) in two electronic copies (one named and one anonymous), as .doc or .docx files 
(compatible with MS Office 97/2003 or MS Office 97/2007) in one of the official languages of the Conference (in 
which the final text of the paper should be written, too). The anonymous copy should not include self-citations in the 
body or bibliography. In unavoidable instances, the term "Author" with the publication date of the article may be 
used. 
E 
Λ  
Ε  Τ  Ο 
L 
E
2 
 
Each contributor may be a) the single author of one paper and co-author in one more, or b) co-author of at most 
two papers. Submissions from students may be accepted only if co-authored by their supervising professor(s). 
The following items must appear on the page of the named copy of the abstract: 
a) name, place and dates of the Conference: 15th Conference “Hellenic Language and Terminology”, Athens, 
6–8 November, 2025 
b) title of the paper  
c) the theme(s) (see above) the paper comes under and 
d) name, affiliation, tel. no, and e-mail address of the author(s). 
On the anonymous copy only a), b) and c) should be written. 
The two files of the abstract should be sent by e-mail, as attached files, to: valeonti@otenet.gr  
Following the examination of the abstracts by the Scientific Committee of the Conference, the authors of the 
selected papers will be notified and receive the necessary information for the preparation and submission of the full 
texts of their papers (which will be included in the papers’ volume of the Conference (both printed and electronic). 
All information about the Conference will be posted on the website:  
https://eleto.gr/en/events/terminology-conferences/15th-conference-hellenic-language-and-terminology-athens-6-8-
november-2025/  
 
