SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Members/FilopoulosCV_EN.pdf

Vasilis A. Filopoulos 
 
 
Born in Athens, Greece, on 29 November 1932. 
Married, two children. 
Passed away on 10 December 2007 
 
Educational Background: 
 
1950 Classical Gymnasium (Ancient Greek, Latin), Athens (8 years High School) 
1957 Dipl. Chemical Engineer, National Technical University of Athens 
1959 Course on Small Industry, OECD, Italy 
1962 Post graduate Diploma (D.I.C.), Imperial College of Science and Technology, 
London, England 
1964 M.Sc.On Science of Materials, University of London, England 
 
Academic Tasks: 
 
1974-81 Ass. Professor at Athens High School of Engineers 
1987-93 Ass. Professor at the Technological Educational Institute of Piraeus 
1987 Principal of ELOT Educational Centre. 
 
Professional Career: 
 
1960-76 Held several managerial posts in industry 
 
1977 Manager of various departments of Hellenic Organization for Standardization 
(ELOT). Started and developed Hellenic Standardization. 
 
Published more than 60 scientific and technical papers in various journals about Science 
of Materials, Chemical Engineering, Standardization, Quality and Terminology. Author of 
three specialized dictionaries and author or co author of numerous glossaries. 
 
Translated many articles. 
 
Organized conferences, seminars and workshops, five of them on language and 
terminology. 
 
Author of six books. 
 
Lectured on various subjects of his interest. 
 
Prominent member of standardization committee ELOT/TE 21 "Principles of Terminology". 
 
Founding member of 
Hellenic Acoustical Society (HAS) 
Hellenic Society for Polymers 
Hellenic Society for Terminology (ELETO). 
 
President of ELETO and prominent member of ELETO’s General Scientific Board (GESY) 
devotedly for 14 years (from ELETO’s foundation, in 1992, to his death). 
 
Chairman of the Advisory Council of the European Association for Terminology (EAFT). 
 
President of KRICOS of Athens (The Greek Chapter of an international cultural and 
scientific organization of professionals of Hellenic origin). 
