SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/9th%20Conference/9thHeLaTerm_2013_PressRelease2_EN.pdf

PRESS RELEASE 
HELLENIC ASSOCIATION  
NATIONAL & KAPODISTRIAN 
FOR TERMINOLOGY (ΕLΕΤΟ) 
UNIVERSITY OF ATHENS 
 
 
9th Conference “Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
Athens, 7-9 November 2013  
 
ELETO – EAFT Symposium “National Languages and Terminology in Higher  
Education, Science & Technology” 
 
Athens, 7 November 2013  
 
The Hellenic Society for Terminology (ELETO) and the National and Kapodistrian University of Athens 
(UOA), in cooperation with the National Technical University of Athens (NTUA), the Aristotle University 
of Thessaloniki (AUTH), the University of Cyprus (UOC), the Technical Chamber of Greece (TEE), the 
National System of Quality Infrastructure/ Hellenic Organization for Standardization (ESYP/ ELOT), 
the Institute for Language and Speech Processing (ILSP/ “Athena” RC) and the Organization for the 
Promotion of the Greek Language (ODEG) organized the 9th Conference “Hellenic Language and 
Terminology”, which was dedicated to the great poet Constantine Cavafy. 
 
The 9th Conference began on Thursday, 7 November 2013 at 19:00, with the Opening Session, which 
was held in “Stoa tou Vivliou” (www.stoabibliou.gr). On behalf of the Rector of the Athens University 
Prof. Th. Pelegrinis, the Dean Prof. Amalia Moser welcomed the participants with a short speech. 
There followed short introductory speeches by the Chair of the Organizing Committee Mr. Kostas 
Valeontis, the Chair of the Scientific Committee of the Conference Prof. Panagiotis Kontos and the 
Chair of the European Association for Terminology (EAFT) Mr. Jan Hoel. There followed greetings by 
the representatives of the co-organizers and, in particular, Prof. Anna Anastasiadis-Symeonidis, 1st 
Vice-Chair of the Scientific Committee and representative of the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 
Prof. Marilena Karyolaimou, representative of the University of Cyprus and deputy of the 2nd Vice-
Chair of the Scientific Committee Prof. Marianna Katsoyannou, the Chair of TEE Mr. Christos 
Spirtzis, Mr. Ioannis Saridakis as representative of the CEO of ESYP/ ELOT Mr. Angelos Tolkas as 
well as the Chair of ODEG Mr. Konstantinos Karkanias. 
 
After the official Opening of the Conference by the Chair of the Scientific Committee Prof. Panagiotis 
Kontos, Mrs. Martha Vassiliadis, lecturer at the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, delivered a 
solemn speech titled “Miso- en merei, san”: the dialectic of ambiguity and techniques of fission in 
Cavafy’s poetry. 
 
2 
 
 
The main works of the 9th Conference took place at the Eugenides Foundation (387 Syngrou Av.). 
They started on Friday, 8 November 2013 at 8:00 (Arrival of the participants) and ended on Saturday, 
9 November 2013 at 19:30 (End of the Conference). There were 34 papers presented, approved by 
the Scientific Committee, while the Invited Speaker Ms. Marilena Karyolaimou, Professor of 
Linguistics at the UOC, presented a paper titled ‘Bilingualism’ or the wandering of a term in the field of 
sociolinguistics. 
 
The Conference comprised the following topics: Linguistic-Ontological principles of Terminology, 
Didactics and Terminology, Terminology in specific subject fields – Lexicographical and 
terminographical studies, Terminological resources – New technologies and terminology, 
Standardization of terminology, Terminology and translation. Those who participated in the 
Conference, both in their presentations and in the ensuing discussions, expressed the desire and the 
need to cooperate in order to obtain information about and support of actions relating to the 
conference subject. Moreover, it is worth noting that a significant percentage of young scientists 
participated in the Conference (graduates of linguistics, translation studies and other related 
industries, as well as graduates of information technology, economic and social sciences, etc.). 
 
The last two hours of the Conference were dedicated to an Round Table (open to the public) on “The 
Greek Language in Higher Education, Science and Technology – National and International 
Dimension”, in which the following rapporteurs-interlocutors participated: Mr. Jan Roukens (EAFT), 
Ms. Anna Anastasiadis-Symeonidis (AUTH), Ms. Amalia Moser (UOA), Ms. Ioanna Kondyli 
(UOA), Mr. George Vlachos (NTUA), Ms. Marilena Karyolaimou (UOC); the Round Table was 
moderated by the Prof. Emer. (NTU) Mr. Theodossios Tassios. 
 
Furthermore, in the morning of Thursday, 8 November 2013, at Kostis Palamas building of the 
University of Athens, a Symposium on the same subject had been held at European level (National 
Languages and Terminology in Higher Education, Science and Technology), in conjunction with the 
9th Conference, with the ELETO and the EAFT as its main organizers and the UOA and the UOC as 
co-organizers. Speakers at the Workshop were representatives of institutions from Greece and other 
European countries, in particular Cyprus, the Netherlands, Spain (Catalonia), Sweden, Norway, 
France, the United Kingdom (Wales), Estonia and Slovenia. The aim of the Workshop was to explore 
the situation, raising awareness and mobilizing civil society, as well as to draw conclusions about 
Greece and the rest of Europe. Both the Symposium and the Round Table at the end of the 9th 
Conference illustrated the current situation and developed reflections on the benefits and risks of the 
use of English in the educational process in universities, while recommendations were made on the 
need for developing and implementing language policy in educational institutions in order to support 
active bilingualism rather than the exclusive use of one language, to ensure quality of knowledge 
transfer and to protect cultural and linguistic diversity of peoples and countries that make up Europe 
and define their identity. Apart from the ELETO, the EAFT and the co-organizers of the conference, 
3 
 
the General Delegation for the French Language and the Languages of France (DGLFLF) was a 
sponsor of the Workshop as well. All presentations of the Workshop have been electronically 
published on the relevant website (http://www.eleto.gr/en/ELETO-EAFT_Conference_2013-11-
07.html) 
 
All the papers of the 9th Conference are included in the 448-page Proceedings volume which has 
already been printed and given to the participants along with other material from the Conference. The 
texts of the presentations which were approved for the 9th Conference and the Roun Table will be 
electronically published on the Conference website (http://www.eleto.gr/en/Conference09.html). 
 
The tradition of the "Hellenic Language and Terminology" Conferences continues. These 
Conferences, which take place every other year, examine terminological issues either of the Greek 
language itself or of the Greek language in relation to other languages, which attract the interest of 
Greek and foreign scholars. The conclusions arising from these Conferences help in the further 
development and enrichment of the "horizontal" field of terminology in principles, methods and 
practices that serve, in their turn, all fields of knowledge, since "there is no knowledge without 
terminology". 
 
Contributors to the success of the 9th Conference "Hellenic Language and Terminology" – which 
the participants themselves marked as excellent – were: the institutions which provided sites and 
conference facilities, the speakers/authors of the presentations, the guest speakers, the panellists and 
the members of the two Committees (the Organizing one and the Scientific one) as well as the 
Secretariat, the session panellists, the moderator and the interlocutors of the Round Table and all 
participants with their interest, including a few foreigners – EAFT members – who honoured the 
Conference with their presence, as well as the interpreters and technicians with their excellent 
support. Finally, it would have been impossible to organize the Conference, if the biggest part of costs 
had not been covered by courtesy of the "dedicated" Sponsors of the Conference, who are 
distinguished by their sensitivity as far as Greek language and terminology are concerned. 
 
The Organizing Committee 
