SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/ELETO-EAFT_Conference_2013-11-07/ELETO-EAFT-Symposium-2013_Jordi%20Bover_Paper_EN.pdf

EAFT–ELETO Symposium 
“National Languages and Terminology  
in Higher Education, Science & Technology” 
Athens, Greece, 7 November 2013 
 
The Catalan Situation 
Marta de Blas, Jordi Bover 
The Present Situation 
When it comes to the current situation of Catalan in the area of higher education, we should be 
aware of a few specific factors of the singular Catalan reality: 
1. Catalonia has a four decades long tradition ofan explicit university language policy, 
associated withprocesses of planned change of language use, promoted and leaded by 
the universities and the government of Catalonia. 
 
In the second half of the seventies of the twentieth century, when the forty years of the 
dictatorship and the prohibition of use of Catalan came to an end, the Catalan 
universities approved linguistic standardization plans, which objective was to promote 
the use of Catalan to make it a common language at the university, in an environment 
where the Spanish had been the only language formally recognized.  In a parallel 
manner, the legal frame was developed that made Catalan the official and own 
language of Catalonia and the Spanish the second official language too. 
In this frame TERMCAT was created to provide Catalan language with specific terms in 
different fields of knowledge. Since its creation, in 1985, TERMCAT haspublished more 
than 600 multilingual dictionaries, which includes 300,000 concepts. Definitely, the 
absence of Catalan terminology wouldn’t be the reason why teachers don’t use Catalan 
when teaching. 
 
2. The increasing use of English at the Catalan universities is not being seen,-at least, not 
at the moment-, as a threat, but as an opportunity. It allowsstudents from all over the 
world to come to the Catalan Universities and also provides the completion of the 
studies in English to the Catalan students, which consequentlygives them a perspective 
to find a job in foreign countries.  
 
It must be taken into account that the level of knowledge of the English language in the 
territory where Catalan is spoken, just like in the entire Spain, is slightly lower than in 
other European countries, even among the university students and research groups.  
For that reason, every initiative that can foster English is perceived not only as positive 
but also as necessary.  
Making good use of this Catalan tradition of Language Planning and having in mind its will of 
internationalization, from 2007, Language Plans, approved and agreed on by the highest 
governing bodies of each University, have begun to be developed in the Catalan universities. 
Language Plans 
The language plans are tools of the universities to manage multilingualism: the language model 
is agreed on and the transverse goals and actions are set to extend the knowledge, use, quality 
2 
 
and interaction of languages that are in use at the university. A feature that characterizes the 
language plans is its cross-disciplinary character: it affects all areas of the University. 
Basically, it encourages the use of Catalan as anown language and the promotion of the third 
languages, especially English, associated with the internationalization, the improvement of 
competitiveness and the training of students. 
The Government of Catalonia promotes achieving of these objectives by means of a policy of 
economic incentives. Currently, the linguistics goals are: 
• 
linguistic quality of English and Catalan versions of websites of universities, 
• 
improvement of knowledge of Catalan and other languages of the university staff, 
• 
percentage of subjects and groups for which the language of impartment is known prior 
to the completion of the registration,    
• 
increase of the volume of teaching in Catalan or in a third language, 
• 
and improvement of knowledge of Catalan among students and teachers from outside 
of the Catalan linguistic area. 
As examples of actions contained in the language plans we can mention the following: 
• 
Announcements of grants for language learning  
• 
Announcements of grants for the linguistic review of doctoral theses and teaching 
materials in Catalan and English  
• 
Level test in English, French, German or Italian for the students from new access  
• 
Linguistic and cultural reception programme for international students  
• 
Resources and activities for the promotion of intercultural competence and skills in 
effective communication  
• 
Style-sheet in English and trilingual University nomenclature: Catalan, Spanish and 
English. 
 
The linguistic security: language of impartment 
It is worth mentioning that the language plans establish the linguistic guarantees of students: a 
teacher has the freedom to choose the language of impartingthe course, but he has the 
obligation to make public his choice before the students are registered: this is what is called the 
student's linguistic security.  
This way students avoid surprises at the start of the classes and also situations in which the 
teacher has to change language of imparting are prevented(mostly, from Catalan to Spanish, 
because one single student doesn´t understand the lecture). 
It must be said that, in every case, this freedom of teaching language co-exists in general with 
the students’ freedom to choose the language that they prefer for their interventions in class or 
to write the exams, which can be different from the language of impartment.   
In this figure is shown the data regarding the evolution of teaching languages in both levels, 
degrees and MA’s, in Catalan public university system during the last three academic years: 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
It should be highlighted that in the degree level of teaching the preponderance of 
Catalan is very obvious; however, in the master degree level, the use of English and 
Spanish is much higher, actually, increases every year. 
Options for the future 
We believe that language plans, agreed and approved by the governing bodies, should 
be implemented in a general way at European universities to ensure the use of the 
national languages in peaceful coexistence with English, that will continue to have a 
predominant use as a lingua franca, especially in a cutting-edge research. 
From a terminological point of view, it is necessary to develop terminology resources, 
at least, bilingual, that allow the correspondence between the English denomination 
and every correspondent national language denomination of the specialized concepts 
that are discussed in different fields of knowledge. In this way, the coexistence of 
teaching in anational language and teaching in English will be possible and the 
transition from one to the other will be provided to teachers and students. Ideally, a 
great multilingual terminological database, online and free, consulted on subject and on 
any language, will permit convey all this information swiftly. 
 
Marta de Blas 
Jordi Bover 
 
Barcelona, 7 November2013 
G356_2013_Atenes 
Teaching 
language 
CATALAN 
SPANISH 
ENGLISH 
Year 
2010-11 
2011-12 
2012-13 
2010-11 
2011-12 
2012-13 
2010-11 
2011-12 
2012-13 
DEGREES 
75,8% 
77,2% 
75,4% 
18,4% 
15,5% 
16,0% 
4,2% 
5,4% 
6,0% 
MASTERS 
67,0% 
61,3% 
56,9% 
21,5% 
20,3% 
20,8% 
11,3% 
18,2% 
22,1% 
