SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/14th Conference/Papers-and-speakers/14th_001b_RocheChristophe_Ontology for terminology.pdf

14th Conference “Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
9–11 November 2023, Online 
 
14 
Ontology for terminology: A passport to the digital world 
 
Christophe Roche 
ABSTRACT 
Many IT applications rely on a computational representation of the conceptual system of terminologies, 
such as content management systems and the semantic web, to name a few. In this context, the notion 
of ontology in the sense of Knowledge Engineering (KE) represents one of the most promising 
perspectives for the operationalization of terminologies. Unfortunately, the theories of concept in KE and 
ISO as defined by ISO 1087 and 704 standards are not compatible. Even if the objective of the ISO 
standards is for communication between humans and not for IT, their principles deserve to be taken into 
account for building ontologies since they correspond to the way terminologists work. The question is 
how to translate these principles into a software environment. 
 
 
 
 
0   Introduction 
There are many applications that rely on a computational representation of terminologies, 
i.e., a computational representation of the linguistic dimension and of the conceptual system. 
Multilingual semantic search engines, content management systems, translation, and 
specialised dictionaries (Alcina et al., 2019) are some examples. This approach is not new. 
Figure 1 is taken from a multilingual content management system applied to technical 
documents written in different languages in the field of renewable energy (Roche, 2010). 
The documents are classified on the concepts according to their designations which appear 
in the texts. This approach enables a concept-driven search. The system returns all the 
documents, regardless of the language in which they are written, indexed by the concepts 
extracted from the query. Using conceptual relationships improves the relevance of the 
results.  
A computational representation of the conceptual system is an ontology in the sense of 
Knowledge Engineering1 (KE). Ontology is one of the most promising ways of 
operationalising terminologies leading to the notion of ontoterminology, a terminology whose 
conceptual system is a formal ontology (Roche, 2007;Papadopoulou & Roche, 2018). 
                                                                
1  
Discipline names are capitalized. 
14th Conference “Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
9–11 November 2023, Online 
15 
 
Figure 1. Ontology-oriented Content Management System 
More recent applications of the Semantic Web, Linked and Open Data (LOD), and 
Knowledge Graph (KG), including Internet content management applications such as e-
commerce sites or cultural content sites, require a formal definition of concepts. This raises 
the problem of the compatibility of the theories of concept in KE and Terminology. 
The article is structured as follows. The first chapter is devoted to a reminder of the theory of 
concept in Terminology as defined by the ISO 1087:2019 (International Organization for 
Standardization 
[ISO], 
2019) 
and 
ISO 
704:2022 
(International 
Organization 
for 
Standardization [ISO], 2022) standards. We will then introduce the theory of concept in 
ontology in KE, as it is implemented in Protégé, the most widely used ontology building 
software. The third part will be devoted to the translation of the ISO principles into Protégé. 
The fourth part is a response to the problems raised by this translation. Indeed, 
implementing the ISO principles needs some clarification. The TEDI software environment 
dedicated to ontoterminology is representative of this approach. The article will be illustrated 
with an example taken from the Krater's terminology of ancient Greek vases. 
1   The theory of concept of ISO 10872 and ISO 704 
The ISO (International Organization for Standardization) Terminology is defined by two 
standards of the Subcommittee ISO/TC37/SC1 ‘Principles and methods’ of the Technical 
Committee ISO/TC37 ‘Language and terminology’. The ISO 1087:2019 standard establishes 
                                                                
2  
The author of the article was Project Leader for the latest version of ISO 1087:2019 standard, and 
expert for ISO 704:2022. He chaired the Terminology Committee of AFNOR (French Organization 
for Standardization) from 2014 to 2023. 
14th Conference “Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
9–11 November 2023, Online 
16 
“basic terms and definitions for terminology work and terminology science” when the ISO 
704:2022 establishes “the basic principles and methods for preparing and compiling 
terminologies both inside and outside the framework of standardization. It describes the links 
between objects, concepts, definitions and designations”. 
ISO 1087 and 704 standards are primarily concerned with human communication, not with 
IT applications: “It does not include terms and definitions that are specific to computer 
applications in terminology work” (ISO, 2019), “The goal of terminology work as described in 
this document is, thus, a clarification and standardization of terminology for communication 
between humans.” (ISO, 2022). Although they may, in theory, be applicable to other fields, 
including information modelling, this is not their primary objective: “Terminology work can 
also support knowledge modelling, information modelling, data modelling and classification, 
but this document does not cover these fields.” (Ibidem). The ISO theory of the concept as 
stated by the ISO 1087 and 704 standards cannot be directly operationalized, as some ISO 
standards rightly point out, which calls for a revision of some notions: “The preparation of 
this International Standard brought to light an urgent need to review the family of 
terminological standards ISO 704, ISO 1087, ISO 17115 and EN 12264 in order to clarify the 
relations between concept, generic concept, specific concept, object, class, instance, 
designation and formal representation. This also applies to the forthcoming edition of 
ISO/TR 24156 (all parts).” (ISO, 2012). 
The ISO standards define a concept as a “unit of knowledge created by a unique 
combination of characteristics” (ISO,2019) independently of any language: “Concepts are 
not necessarily bound to particular natural languages. They are, however, influenced by the 
social or cultural background which often leads to different categorizations.” (Ibidem). A 
characteristic is defined as an “abstraction of a property” of an object. The focus is on 
essential characteristics as they are indispensable to understanding concepts. ISO 
distinguishes two types of concepts according to the number of objects they correspond to. 
The individual concept “corresponds to a unique object” (ISO,2019) and the general concept 
“corresponds to a potentially unlimited number of objects which form a group by reason of 
shared properties” (Ibidem). 
Concepts are organised into a concept system defined as a “set of concepts structured in 
one or more related domains according to the concept relations among its concepts” 
(Ibidem). All relations are “relations between concepts” (Ibidem) divided into hierarchical 
relations, i.e., generic relations and partitive relations, and associative relations including 
sequential, spatial, temporal, and causal relations. To sum up: 
14th Conference “Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
9–11 November 2023, Online 
17 
- 
The notion of characteristic is central to the ISO theory of concept and, more 
particularly, the notion of essential characteristic. 
- 
The notion of object has disappeared in favour of that of individual concept. The 
object is only considered through the concept that corresponds to. 
- 
All relationships are relationships between concepts only. 
While this approach is easy to understand, it raises epistemological and logical problems, 
which are obstacles to computer implementation (Roche, 2012). An object is only taken into 
account through an individual concept whose extension is a set containing only the object 
itself. The object 'Moon'3 will be represented by the individual concept 'Moon' whose 
extension is the set containing the single object 'Moon', i.e., using the set notation: { 'Moon' 
}. Apart from the unnecessary complexity this introduces, it raises the problem of the nature 
of a concept whose extension is reduced to a single object, for example, the concept of 
‘natural satellite of Earth'. Is it an individual concept or a general concept? The latest version 
of the standard sidesteps the problem by adding the words "potentially unlimited" to the 
definition of the general concept, which is not satisfactory. This refusal of an explicit 
representation of objects has an impact on relationships. The instantiation relation 
(exemplification) between an object and the concept to which it belongs does not exist. It is 
replaced by the generic relation, which raises the question of the essential and distinctive 
characteristics of individual concepts. Partitive and associative relations, relations between 
objects, become conceptual relations in the same way as generic relations. 
2   Ontology in Knowledge Engineering 
An ontology in KE is a “specification of a conceptualisation”, i.e., “a description (like a formal 
specification of a program) of the concepts and relationships that can exist” (Gruber et al., 
1993). The notion of ontology has given rise to different definitions presented in the article 
"What Is an Ontology?" (Guarino et al., 2009). Like Terminology, Ontology aims to facilitate 
communication between agents, including software agents for ontology. It constitutes one of 
the most promising perspectives for Terminology. For example, it structures terminologies 
for computer processing in many fields, such as Medicine, Smart City and Digital Humanities 
(Papadopoulou & Roche, 2018; Piccini, 2015). Nevertheless, an ontology is not a 
terminology even if some definitions can suggest the opposite: “an [explicit] ontology may 
take a variety of forms, but necessarily it will include a vocabulary of terms and some 
specification of their meaning (i.e. definitions)” (Ushold et al., 1996). Indeed, Ontology does 
                                                                
3  
Objects, concepts, properties, characteristics, and relations are indicated by single quotation marks 
(ISO 1087) 
14th Conference “Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
9–11 November 2023, Online 
18 
not explicitly take into account the linguistic dimension of Terminology often reduced to 
labels stuck on concepts. 
Figure 2 is an example taken from Gene Ontology, which provides a computational 
representation 
of 
current 
scientific 
knowledge 
about 
the 
functions 
of 
genes 
(http://geneontology.org/docs/introduction-to-go). 
 
 
Figure 2. The Gene Ontology uploaded into Protégé 
There are different theories of the concept in KE, depending on whether the emphasis is 
placed on the nature of the objects, their description, structure and composition, their 
relationships, and more generally their properties. In this article, we focus on the Description 
Logic (DL) (Baader et al., 2003) that is currently the most widely used for ontology 
representation. Unlike the ISO theory of concept, objects, also called individuals in the 
sense they are indivisible, are explicitly represented. Objects are linked by binary 
relationships, also called properties. The notion of concept is replaced with the notion of 
class understood as a set of individuals. This approach aims to organise objects into classes 
according to the relations between objects. The notion of essential characteristic does not 
exist. It is important to note that a class does not gather objects of the same ‘nature’, but 
objects verifying the same property defined in terms of relationships.  For example, the class 
Parisian is the set of individuals, members of the class Person, living in Paris, which will be 
written in:   
Parisian = { x / Person (x) ∧ lives-In (x,Paris) } 
14th Conference “Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
9–11 November 2023, Online 
19 
Concept and class express a different understanding and organisation of the world. A 
concept brings together objects of the same nature, for example, the concept of 'Person', 
whereas a class gathers objects that may be of different nature but which verify the same 
property. For example, the class of red objects would include my uncle's Ferrari, the apple I 
ate for lunch and my grandson's ball. These two notions are not mutually exclusive, quite the 
contrary: they complement each other. The previous example about the notion of "Parisian" 
will be expressed more "naturally" in the form of a class than a concept.  
Relationships between classes (class hierarchy corresponding to set inclusion), between 
objects and classes (instantiation in the sense of belonging to a set) and between objects 
(such as partitive and associative relationships) are clearly distinguished. 
Protégé (Figure 2), an open-source software developed at Stanford University 
(https://protege.stanford.edu/), is the most widely used ontology environment based on 
Description Logic (DL). It offers a wide range of features and benefits from a large 
community (Musen et al., 2015). 
3   Implementation issues of the ISO principles 
The ISO theory of concept and the KE theory of class (based on DL) are not compatible. 
Their theoretical foundations are different. Intensional for the former, extensional for the 
latter, for which an object is not defined by what it is, but by its relations with other objects. 
The problem then is to translate the ISO principles into Description Logic. Let us illustrate 
this process with the example of the Ancient Greek vases of kraters4. Kraters are vases for 
mixing wine and water, whereas amphorae are for storage and transport. Column-kraters, 
volute-kraters, and calyx-kraters are named after their handles, when bell-krater is named 
after its body. Column-kraters and volute-kraters are with a neck whereas calyx-krater and 
bell-krater are without neck. ‘for storage and transport’, ‘for mixing wine and water’, ‘with 
column-like handles’, ‘with volute-like handles’, ‘with calyx-like handles’, ‘with neck’, and 
‘without neck’ are essential and delimiting characteristics. The ‘column-krater’ concept is 
defined by the unique combination of ‘for mixing wine and water’, ‘with neck’, and ‘with 
column-like handles’.   
The notion of essential characteristic does not exist in Protégé and cannot be directly 
represented5. It has to be translated as property restrictions forcing the expert to change his 
way of thinking. The object must be split into parts in order to link the whole to its parts with 
                                                                
4  
Beazley archive: http://www.beazley.ox.ac.uk/tools/pottery/shapes/kraters.htm 
5  
Essential characteristic corresponds to rigid predicate of higher order logic 
14th Conference “Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
9–11 November 2023, Online 
20 
the ‘has-part’’ relationship. The class Colum-krater is the set of vases linked to one neck and 
to two column-like handles. Translating the absence of part (‘without neck’) and function (‘for 
mixing wine and water’) raises other kinds of problems requiring a background in Logic. 
Figure 3 illustrates the Krater ontology in Protégé quite far from the ISO approach. The 
Bell_krater class is defined as the intersection of subclasses. 
 
Figure 3. Definition of the Bell-krater class in Protégé 
Protégé is a powerful tool for building ontologies. It is dedicated to the organisation of 
individuals (objects) into classes based on the relationships between objects. The notions of 
concept and essential characteristic do not exist. They must be translated, which forces 
terminologists and experts to change their way of thinking (Roche & Papadopoulou, 2019), 
and adapt to a tool that is difficult to master (Horridge et al., 2013). 
4   Ontoterminology 
The alternative approach is to directly implement the ISO principles. While essential 
characteristics and concepts can be explicitly represented, some notions need to be 
clarified. The result is a system where: 
- objects are explicitly represented; the individual concept is no longer necessary. The 
object ‘Moon’ is no longer confused with the concept ‘natural satellite of the Earth’ whose 
14th Conference “Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
9–11 November 2023, Online 
21 
extension is the set reduced to the only object ‘Moon’ 
- descriptive characteristics, such as colour and weight, complete the description of 
objects 
- the relations are clearly distinguished according to the type of entities linked by the 
relations:  
o the ‘instantiation’ relation links an object to the concept of which it is an instance 
(exemplification). The object ‘Canada’ is an instance of the concept ‘country’. 
o the ‘generic relation’ links a specific concept to a generic concept. The concept 
‘chair’ is a subordinate concept of ‘seat’. 
o ‘partitive’ and ‘associative’ relations link objects. For example, the ‘hasPart’ relation 
links objects of type ‘chair’ to objects of type ‘back’ and ‘foot’.  
 
Figure 4. Concept Editor 
These 
principles 
were 
implemented 
in 
the 
TEDI 
software 
environment 
(http://ontoterminology.com/tedi). TEDI (for ontoTerminology EDItor) was designed to take 
into account as much as possible the ISO Terminology principles and the way experts and 
14th Conference “Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
9–11 November 2023, Online 
22 
terminologists think. The two dimensions of terminology, linguistic and conceptual, are 
explicitly represented leading to the notion of ontoterminology, terminology whose 
conceptual system is a formal ontology. 
Figure 4 illustrates the TEDI Concept editor (essential characteristics are named differences, 
and descriptive characteristics are called attributes). Concept names and terms are not 
confused since they belong to different semiotic systems. Concept names are automatically 
built in such a way that by reading them one understands the nature of the subsumed 
objects whereas terms are given from texts. Concepts are formally defined in LOK 
(Language for Ontoterminological Knowledge), a formal language dedicated to defining 
ontoterminologies. 
Figure 5 illustrates the TEDI term editor. Equivalent terms, terminological hypernyms and 
synonyms are automatically calculated. A template for the definition of terms in natural 
language is generated from the formal definition of the concepts designated by the terms.  
 
Figure 5. Term Editor 
14th Conference “Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
9–11 November 2023, Online 
23 
5   Conclusion 
Ontology in KE (based on DL as implemented in Protégé) represents one of the most 
promising perspectives for the operationalization of terminologies. Unfortunately, the KE and 
ISO theories of concept are not compatible. ISO and KE are two different approaches, 
intensional for the former and extensional for the latter. Ontology focuses on individuals 
grouped into classes according to their relationships whereas ISO focuses on concepts 
defined as combinations of essential characteristics. Translating the ISO principles in a 
Description Logic is always possible, but rarely in a transparent way. This approach is too 
distant from the way terminologists think.  
The solution is to implement the ISO principles. Unfortunately, some ISO principles are 
inconsistent from a logical point of view and need to be updated. Objects have to be 
explicitly represented, replacing the individual concept. Relations are no longer confused, 
but clearly distinguished according to the types of objects linked by the relations. 
Ontology has strongly impacted Terminology in its principles and methods. By clearly 
separating and expressing the linguistic dimension and the conceptual dimension, terms and 
concept names are not confused, since they belong to two different dimensions, as well as 
the definitions of terms in natural language are not confused with the definitions of concepts 
in formal language. 
Bibliography 
Alcina A., Costa R., & Roche C. (2019). Terminology and e-dictionaries [Special issue]. 
Terminology, 25(2). 
Baader F., Calvanese D., McGuinness D., Nardi D., & Peter Patel-Schneider P. (2003). The 
Description Logic Handbook. Cambridge University Press. 
Gruber T. (1993). A Translation Approach to Portable Ontology Specifications. Knowledge 
Acquisition, 5(2), 199-220. 
Guarino N., Oberle D., & Staab S. (2009). What Is an Ontology?. In Handbook on 
Ontologies (pp. 2-17). Springer. 
Horridge, M., Tudorache, T., Vendetti, J., Nyulas, C.I., Musen, M.A., & Noy, N.F. (2013). 
Simplified OWL Ontology Editing for the Web: Is WebProtégé Enough?. In The Semantic 
Web – ISWC 2013. ISWC 2013. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 8218. Springer.  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-41335-3_13 
International Organization for Standardization. (2012). Health informatics — Categorial 
structure for terminological systems of surgical procedures (ISO 1828:2012). 
International Organization for Standardization. (2019). Terminology work and terminology 
science — Vocabulary (ISO 1087:2019). 
International Organization for Standardization. (2022). Terminology work — Principles and 
methods (ISO 704:2022). 
14th Conference “Hellenic Language and Terminology” 
9–11 November 2023, Online 
24 
Musen, M.A., & Team Protégé. (2015). The Protégé project: A look back and a look forward. 
AI Matters. Association of Computing Machinery Specific Interest Group in Artificial 
Intelligence, 1(4), June.  https://doi.org/10.1145/2557001.25757003. 
Papadopoulou M., & Roche C. (2018). Ontologization of Terminology. A worked example 
from the domain of ancient Greek dress. AIDAinformazioni Journal, XXXVI(1-2), 89-107. 
Piccini, S. (2015). PLOTITERM: modélisation de la terminologie de Plotin en OWL. In TOTh 
2015, Terminology & Ontology: Theories and applications (pp 313-343). 
Roche C. (2007). Le terme et le concept: fondements d’une ontoterminologie. Terminologie 
& Ontologie: In Théories et applications - TOTh 2007, Annecy (pp. 1-22). 
Roche C. (2010). Ontology-oriented Content Management System: The ASTECH Project. In 
Heat-SET 2010. Opatija, CROATIA, October 18-22. 
Roche, C. (2012). Should Terminology Principles be re-examined?. TKE 2012, 10th 
Terminology and Knowledge Engineering Conference, Madrid (Spain), 19-22 June (pp.17-
32). 
Roche C., & Papadopoulou M. (2019). Mind the Gap: Ontology Authoring for Humanists. In 
1st International Workshop for Digital Humanities and their Social Analysis (WODHSA), 
Graz (Austria), September 23-25.  
Uschold M., & Gruninger M. (1996). Ontologies: Principles, Methods and Applications. 
Knowledge Engineering Review, 11(2), 93-136. 
 
 
Prof Christophe Roche 
ERA Chair Holder, University of Crete (Greece) 
Université Savoie Mont Blanc (France) 
e-mail: christophe.roche@uoc.gr 
Website: http://christophe-roche.fr/ 
 
 
