SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/10th%20Conference/Papers-and-speakers/10th_14-25-31_KaterinakisTheodoros_Paper_V03.pdf

ΕΛΕΤΟ – 10ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 12-14 Νοεμβρίου 2015 
212 
14    The concept of "philotimo": Semantics, tradition, and globalization 
of the term for greek identity in an era of crisis 
    
Theodoros Katerinakis 
ABSTRACT 
Since 2009 a turbulent era in the Mediterranean, Greece
1 topped in the news rhetoric in diaspora for 1,000 
times/day, with the use of acronyms like PIIGGS, BRICS etc. which build over stereotypes that transcend 
communication and redefine terminology on nation branding and identity. The current paper reviews the 
roots and tradition of "philotimo", its metaphors and extensions, and focuses on the use the term in 
connection with what is identified as "Greek" in international media coverage. This paper argues that the era 
of economic crisis has affected language use at an international level in media rhetoric and international 
relations. The terminology used towards "philotimo" covers a broad spectrum of topical terminological 
categories from ethics theory and culture to anthropological identities and nation branding. Its association 
with the enculturation in their peer-group called parea and the social networking construction of Homo 
dictyous. 
Every culture and nation possesses and reflects a core value that is at the center of their collective self and 
shared mindset. E.g. USA devotes itself to “freedom”, whereas in Canada the concept of “social justice” 
prevails. In Greek culture this central value is expressed with the term “philotimo”, a non-translatable 
conscious “arete” (of logos) of honor and pride, as expressed through acts of generosity and sacrifice 
(building pathos). Philotimo matches with credibility, with the tendency to cooperate and the ritual of keeping 
your word (face and commitments) without reserving it in a contract (the catalytic appeal of ethos). Philotimo 
has its anthropological roots in the poetics of manhood that are easily observable in micro-communities of 
the Greek periphery and recognized in presidential diplomacy, as commented by the US President B. 
Obama. It is a script of a collective programming of mind for Greeks, with multiple terminological 
connotations and dimensions. 
 
 
                                                 
1  This text uses the root term Hellenic instead of the term Greek in accordance with contemporary usage 
and ELETO's suggestions. The term Greek is also used when the cited literature prefers that. The term 
homo oeconomicus, of Latin origin, emphasizes the ego-interested individual as criticized by Amartya 
Sen: Sen, A.K. (1977) ‘Rational Fools: A critique of the behavioural foundations of economic theory’, 
Philosophy and Public Affairs, 6(4): 317–44. The term homo dictyous, in Hellenic semantics with Latin 
extension, was coined by Christakis and Fowler (2009) and is utilized here to show the interconnections 
of cooperation beyond the reciprocity of homo reciprocans and the social interaction of homo 
communicans. 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 10ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 12-14 Νοεμβρίου 2015 
213 
 
Η έννοια του «φιλότιμου»: Σημασιολογία, παράδοση, και 
παγκοσμιοποίηση του όρου για την ελληνική ταυτότητα  
στην εποχή της κρίσης 
    
Θεόδωρος Κατερινάκης 
ΠΕΡΙΛΗΨΗ 
Από το 2009 μια ταραχώδη εποχή στη Μεσόγειο, η Ελλάδα ξεπέρασε στην ρητορική των ειδήσεων της 
διασποράς για 1.000 φορές / ημέρα, με τη χρήση των ακρωνυμίων όπως PIIGGS, BRICS κλπ, τα οποία 
οικοδομήθηκαν πάνω στα στερεότυπα που ξεπερνούν την επικοινωνία και να επαναπροσδιορίζουν την 
ορολογία σχετικά με την εθνική ταυτότητα, την κοινή γνώμη και τη δημόσια εικόνα. Η παρούσα εργασία 
εξετάζει τις ρίζες και την παράδοση του όρου «φιλότιμο», τις μεταφορές και τιςι προεκτάσεις του και εστιάζει 
στη χρήση του όρου σε σχέση με αυτόν που αναγνωρίζεται ως "Έλληνας" σε διεθνή μέσα μαζικής 
ενημέρωσης. Το επιχείρημα υποστηρίζει ότι η εποχή της οικονομικής κρίσης έχει επηρεάσει τη χρήση της 
γλώσσας σε διεθνές επίπεδο στη ρητορική των μέσων ενημέρωσης και των διεθνών σχέσεων. Η ορολογία 
που χρησιμοποιείται προς το «φιλότιμο» καλύπτει ένα ευρύ φάσμα της  θεματικής ορολογίας σε κατηγορίες 
από την ηθική θεωρία και τον πολιτισμό, στην ανθρωπολογική ταυτότητα και την κρατική επωνυμία. 
Επιπλέον, ερευνάται η σύνδεσή του όρου με κοινωνικές οντότητες όπως η ΅παρέα΅ και ο νεολογισμός του 
δικτυωμένου ανθρώπου (Homo dictyous).Κάθε πολιτισμική ή εθνική οντότητα έχει και αντικατοπτρίζει μια 
βασική αξία που βρίσκεται στο κέντρο του συλλογικού εαυτού τους και την κοινής λογικής των μελών της. 
Π.χ.οι ΗΠΑ τονίζουν την «ελευθερία», ενώ στον Καναδά η έννοια της «κοινωνικής δικαιοσύνης» επικρατεί. 
Στην ελληνική κουλτούρα αυτή η κεντρική αξία εκφράζεται με τον όρο «φιλότιμο», μια μη-μεταφραζόμενη 
συνειδητή«αρετή» (λογικής) της τιμής και περηφάνιας, όπως εκφράζεται μέσα από πράξεις γενναιοδωρίας 
και της θυσίας (με ρητορικό πάθος). Το φιλότιμο ταιριάζει με αξιοπιστία, με την τάση να συνεργάζονται και το 
τελετουργικό της τήρησης του λόγου (πρόσωπο και δεσμεύσεις), χωρίς να υπογράφεται σε ένα συμβόλαιο (ο 
καταλυτικός ρόλος του ήθους). Το φιλότιμο έχει ανθρωπολογικές ρίζες της στην ποιητική του ανδρισμού που 
είναι εύκολα παρατηρήσιμο σε μικρο-κοινότητες της ελληνικής περιφέρειας και αναγνωρίζεται στην  
προεδρική διπλωματία, όπως σχολίασε ο Πρόεδρος των ΗΠΑ Ομπάμα το 2010. Πρόκειται για ένα σενάριο 
ενός συλλογικού προγραμματισμού του εγκεφάλου για τους Έλληνες, με πολλαπλές διαστάσεις ορολογίας. 
To φιλότιμο ορίζεται ως μια έμφυτη ιδιότητα που μπορεί να παρακινήσει τους ανθρώπους να κάνουν 
περισσότερα από ό, τι αναμένεται, χωρίς να περιμένουν τίποτα σε αντάλλαγμα. Ως εκ τούτου, φιλότιμο είναι 
μια αρχή η ζωή για τους Έλληνες,  ερμηνεύεται ως αγάπη για την τιμή, τιμή να δείξεις στους άλλους και τιμή 
να λάβεις  από τους άλλους-και είναι ένα χαρακτηριστικό που είναι έντονο σε μικρές κοινότητες στην 
ελληνική περιφέρεια. Πρόκειται για μια περίπτωση ενός ιδανικού κατά την οποία οι συμμετέχοντες 
αποδέχονται γενικά ένα πρότυπο που βασίζεται στα θεμέλια της κοινωνίας κανονιστικά, όπως ορίζεται από 
τον Habermas [22]. Αυτό το είδος της κανονιστικής ηθικής υπερβαίνει τη δεοντολογία των δασμών και των 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 10ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 12-14 Νοεμβρίου 2015 
214 
κανόνων, καθώς και συνεπειοκρατία. Με αυτή την έννοια, το φιλότιμο στενά αντιστοιχεί στις αρετές και το 
ήθος που ορίζουν την ενάρετη ηθική: η ηθική αρετή, η πρακτική σοφία και η ευδαιμονία-είναι κατανοητή, 
αντικειμενική και συνεπής εμπειρικά [23]. Το φιλότιμο είναι μια αρετή που αντιστοιχεί στην αξιοπιστία, στη 
στάση συνεργασίας και στο τελετουργικό της τήρησης του λόγου (με πρόσωπο και δεσμεύσεις), χωρίς να 
καταγραφεί σε ένα συμβόλαιο. Είναι ένας τρόπος ζωής με ήθος, σύμφωνα με την τελεολογική ερμηνεία του 
Αριστοτέλη. 
Στη τρέχουσα περίοδο της οικονομικής κρίσης και αντι-τραπεζικής ρητορικής, το φιλότιμο ως στοιχείο 
προσωπικής ακεραιότητας, διατήρησης του προσώπου και εμπιστοσύνης είναι απαραίτητο για όλες τις 
τραπεζικές πρακτικές και αποκτά θεσμική στήριξη μέσω των κοινοτικών δικτύων που αποτελούν θεμέλιο 
συνεταιριστικών τραπεζών με τα στοιχεία της συλλογικής ορθολογικότητας. Πρόκειται για ένα σενάριο ενός 
συλλογικού προγραμματισμού τουεγκεφάλου για τους Έλληνες [25], ένα καθοριστικό παράγοντα της ίδρυσης 
των συνεταιρισμού και των πιστωτικών ιδρυμάτων που συνδέονται με την ευρωπαϊκή μεσογειακή κουλτούρα 
και την ελληνική παράδοση. Σε επίπεδο χρηματικών συναλλαγών και  διαπροσωπικών σχέσεων, η 
εμπιστοσύνη οικοδομείται αμοιβαία και υπερβαίνει το homo oeconomicus του «ορθολογισμού», του 
«υπολογισμού» και της «αποτελεσματικότητας» ως απρόσωπης οικονομικής επιταγής. Το φιλότιμο 
μετουσιώνει σημασιολογικά αυτές τις συνεργατικές σχέσεις για τους Έλληνες και στοιχειοθετεί καίριο στοιχείο 
ταυτότητας για την ελληνικότητα, όπως γίνεται αντιληπτή στο εξωτερικό. Μια λέξη, μια αρετή, ένας τρόπος 
ζωής που συνδέει παράδοση και ορολογία με τη μοναδικότητα της ελληνικής ταυτότητας. 
 
 
0   Introduction 
Language is so tightly embedded to human experience since when people meet they are most 
likely that they start exchanging words or symbols [1]. In Greece people consider  themselves a 
brotherless nation that maintained their diachronic identity by cultivating network bonds on 
spatial, cultural, and communal dimensions. Greek language enriches such bonding with 
signifiers which are definitive of Greek identity; philotimo encapsulates the expressive power of 
several attributes of Greek identity, has evolved as a floating signifier used from various agents 
in diverse contexts, during the years of economic crisis.  The words and signals we use capture 
the most “human and humanizing” activity that people execute “[when] talking to each other” [2]. 
All these elements of our interaction using language determine the mode with which we act 
toward people and things: the basis is the meaning we assign to people or things [3].  
Furthermore, meanings are in people –not in words only- and meaning is negotiated through the 
use of language, while people interact. Thus, you hardly understand Greece without referring to 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 10ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 12-14 Νοεμβρίου 2015 
215 
social relations embedded in the local, regional or national collective selves that provides the 
medium for concrete ties of diaspora Greeks with their homeland. Greeks as individuals live in a 
collectivistic culture, belong to their extended families and are enculturated in their peer-group 
called parea2. Parea is constructed in layers, from personal life to school days and professional 
activities. Society is organized in a set of relationships that are endemic in Greek identity. 
Communication materializes any type of relationship in the Greek tradition. The modern homo 
communicans seems to prefer to be connected to and stay in contact with their surrounding 
world. Mutuality matches philotimo with social cohesion as a security mechanism in the current 
era of turbulence and is projected in ethical virtues explicit in the use of language and 
terminology.  
This paper argues that the semantics of philotimo cover multiple layers of Greek culture and 
behavior and are reinforced during the crisis years, and are perceived as identifiers in the 
network structure of establishing and functioning in the base of cooperation. Every national 
culture possesses and reflects a core value that is at the centre of its collective self and shared 
mindset. The USA is devoted to ‘freedom’ (e.g., [4]) and Canada to the concept of "social justice" 
[5]. In Hellenic culture, this central value is philotimo, which is an untranslatable and unique 
cultural virtue of honor and pride idiosyncratic to Hellenes [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12].  
Culture consists of relatively specialized lifestyles, values, beliefs, artifacts, forms of behavior, 
and patterns of communication. Culture includes anything that a group has produced and 
developed—i.e., language, religion, laws, ways of thinking, art, communication patterns, rituals, 
styles, and attitudes [13]. Hofstede [14] provides an operational definition of culture: "A collective 
programming of the mind which distinguishes one group from another… [a type of] mental 
programming… [with] patterns of thinking and feeling and potential acting". Culture defines a 
moral frame with standards about how to belong to, and be an upstanding of a group.  
When people interact and exchange verbal transactions they may disclose different aspects of 
                                                 
2  
Gregory Nagy (http://chs.harvard.edu/CHS/article/display/1234), Director at Harvard University's Center 
for Hellenic Studies, supports the spirit of "parea" as a unique Greek phenomenon. Moreover, he 
connects the Greek Spirit of parea with camaraderie described in the TV Series "Friends" (see the Greek 
Embassy's 
newsletter 
at 
http://us5.campaign-
archive1.com/?u=6cb2d297ff616984b41ff4bae&id=672e064336, Jan 2014). The connection between 
friendship and the Greek collective self is analyzed from Gregory Jusdanis in his book  "A Tremendous 
Thing: Friendship from the "Iliad" to the Internet, Cornell University Press (2015)." 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 10ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 12-14 Νοεμβρίου 2015 
216 
their private, public, collective, and inner ‘self’; cultural, societal, institutional, and deeper value 
factors interfere with, and organize their perception of their actions. If virtues are ethical 
messages, then culture is the propagation channel of these virtues. In the case of the social 
networks that people identify with, the constituent elements of individuals and their relationships 
promote reciprocity in ethical behaviour and facilitate the supplier-customer interaction. Such an 
interaction communicates ‘ethos’ as dependability, in the traditional sender-receiver model of 
communication [15]. 
1   The Hellenic mindset of philotimo 
Since antiquity, Hellenes have considered economics (governing the oikos) as part of their 
inquiry into ethics, politics, and social organization [16]. Traditionally Hellenic economic thought 
is placed within the Mediterranean tradition that perceives the economy as embedded in a web 
of social and political institutions that are regulated by religious and ethical norms [17], [18]. 
Therefore, the economy contributes to developing interpersonal relationships based on the 
mutual respect of oral commitments, pride, and honouring the virtue of philotimo that generates 
bonds of trust [19]. Emphasis on integrity (akeraiotita), the primary layer of current philotimo, has 
been a constant value for centuries [20]. Integrity originally reflected public pressure to behave 
uprightly, a norm of the responsible citizen (politis). In this sense, while profit making can be 
considered legitimate and part of the atomistic system, profiteering is punished [21]. It would be 
unthinkable that someone without integrity—in terms of honesty, justice, and truthfulness—is 
admired. Philotimo seems to have earned the status of a collective conscience in modern Hellas, 
where people no longer philosophize about it or try to impose it on others, but rather take it for 
granted and assume its widespread existence. 
Philotimo is defined as an innate faculty that may motivate people to do more than what is 
expected, without expecting anything in return. Hence, philotimo is a life principle for Hellenes; it 
is interpreted as love for honor—honor ‘to show’ for others and honour ‘to receive’ from others—
and is a characteristic that is intense in small communities on the Hellenic periphery. It is a case 
of an ideal occurrence where participants generally accept a norm based on the foundation of 
that normative society, as defined by Habermas [22]. This type of normative ethics transcends 
the deontology of duties and rules, as well as consequentialism. In this sense, philotimo closely 
corresponds to the virtues and moral character that define virtue ethics. Furthermore, in its 
various manifestations, the three central concepts of virtue ethics—virtue, practical wisdom, and 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 10ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 12-14 Νοεμβρίου 2015 
217 
eudaimonia—are comprehensible, objective, and empirically truthful [23]. Philotimo is a virtue 
that corresponds with credibility, with the tendency to cooperate, and with the ritual of keeping 
your word (face and commitments) without writing a contract;3 it is a way of life with ethos, 
consistent with the teleological approach of Aristotle.  
This attribute of personal integrity, maintaining face, and trust is essential for all banking 
practices and acquires institutional support through community networks that form cooperative 
banks with elements of collective rationality. It is a script of a collective programming of mind for 
Hellenes [25], a determinant of the foundation of cooperative and credit-related institutions in 
European Mediterranean culture and the Hellenic tradition. In monetary transactions and 
intimate relationships, trust is mutually cogenerated and goes beyond the homo oeconomicus of 
‘rationality’, ‘calculation’, and ‘efficiency’ as impersonal economic imperatives. 
2   Moral aspects of philotimo in routine language  
The community of members in the Greek periphery live by the notion of philanthropia as the gist 
of philotimo in several respects. In social enterprises and community-based markets, corporate 
governance issues are manifested as compatible with the concepts of accountability, reliability, 
and transparency. This widespread reference to philanthropia reflects the primary issue of 
philotimo: the collective self is explicitly related to approaches of trust. Trust can be described as 
reflex [26], as a fixed expectation of culture, sometimes as being learned and situational. Trust is 
also considered as a resource of social capital, power, and social support. Salem [26] suggests 
that trust emerges from communicative interaction; trust and communication are interdependent 
and lead to ‘a probability of structural coupling’ between humans.  
Therefore, individuals  achieve a sense of ‘betweenness’ that has its roots in ethical ties of well-
informed citizens. Throughout Hellenic society, the premise of moral equality interacts with 
strategies to gain advantage among widely separated class or professional interests [27]. As 
Campbell [28] describes it, there is a nuance in philotimo, a dependability of moral respect and 
social asymmetry. Moral respect is simultaneously a mask and a condition of mutual 
dependence (and exchange) of shepherds, merchants, and politicians. On the other hand, 
others like Lyberaki and Paraskevopoulos [29]  are skeptical  of the ‘elusive boundaries between 
                                                 
3  
It is also a direct response to rouspheti—the reciprocal dispensation of favours [24]—as practiced and 
enforced during the post-Byzantine Turkish rule of Hellas; it remains as a major obstacle to 
modernization. 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 10ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 12-14 Νοεμβρίου 2015 
218 
social trust and its [Hellenic] substitutive notion of philotimo’, especially when small communities 
are examined. It is a type of critique that supports the fusion of trust with philotimo at a group 
level beyond the criteria of the individual; this argument could be interpreted as a notion of 
institutional philotimo. 
In rural areas, honour and the lack of it takes dimensions that embrace the whole family, 
whereas in the cities it becomes more confounding and individualized. The only social class that 
does not consider honour of such primary importance is the urban middle class. This is 
consistent with Herzfeld’s idea that names are semiotic markers for moral boundaries (in non-
urban settings), since those boundaries are themselves highly flexible: what is considered 
evidence of socially acceptable morality (philotimo) in one individual may be treated as its very 
opposite in another. This morality contagion is a projection of an implicit culture to an explicit 
identity [30]. 
Tracing the roots of community-based moral contagion in contemporary Hellas, there are several 
junctures that created an amalgam of Hellas with its ‘oriental’ self in the post-antiquity period. 
The pre-Islamic Arabs were proud of their pastoral way of life that gave birth to murū’a [31], the 
Arab concept of virtus, which embodies courage in war, hospitality in peace, independence of 
spirit, and love of liberty. A similar connotation is found in Turkish for ‘honour’: seref, izzet, 
haysiyet and onur. The most common word denoting pride is gurur whereas onur is connected 
with philotimo, respectively [32]. In decentralized Hellenic society, such effects in moral values 
are reinforced in local communities, and the value of philotimo is relayed through the social 
networks that shape people’s lives [33]: 
• 
Hellenes prefer self-organization in commons where they recognize common attributes 
forming networks of affiliation. 
• 
Love thy neighbour: The Hellenic state is organized in geographically dispersed local 
communities, starting from the ‘neighbourhood’. Thus, a solid fabric of connected members 
is typical in the Hellenic periphery. 
• 
Communal protection cultivates bonding in Hellas. 
• 
Hellenes are social—so inevitably connected—animals following Aristotle’s principles. 
Again, it is important to distinguish an honour of position, which is an ascribed category related 
to possessions, and a discrete moral category that devolves from achieving reputation among 
social peers. In egalitarian contexts, male competitions subsumed by honour may be expressed 
in terms of ‘seniority’, or ‘respect’ and ‘honor’ [34]. In recent years, philotimo has become an 
ideal; it is the consciousness of superiority of mental achievements against material interests in 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 10ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 12-14 Νοεμβρίου 2015 
219 
life, a subconscious voice of authentic humanism with its own rationale. Personal dignity is the 
consciousness of ultimate sacredness of the corporeal human, but for the Hellenes it is the 
axiom that directs life [35]. Philotimo is one of the ideals that traditional nuclear Hellenic families 
aim to implant in the generations that follow, and it is frequently invoked when asking someone 
to ‘come to one’s senses’ or to correct an undesirable attitude. Similarly, the urge—conscious or 
not— to prove worthy of the nationally praised characterization of philotimos (as an adjective) 
might function as a self-fulfilling prophecy. It involves a collective sense of belonging [36], and 
the positive experience of this identity was the efficiency by, and dithyrambic recognition of 
Hellenic volunteers during the Athens Olympic Games of 2004.4 
In economic terms and banking, philotimo filters relationship-based transactions to implement 
the ‘know your customer’ (KYC)5 policy which involves constant communication with depositors 
and borrowers to increase awareness. This process is not routinely implemented by mainstream 
banks but by cooperative banks in a solidarity economy during the crisis. The lack of a credit 
record, fully documented revenues, and sufficient collateral is compensated by operational 
sources of repayment that connects the individual borrower-member of the bank with their 
collective relations and individual ethical traits of philotimo.   
3   Philotimo as the ethical core observed in banking transactions 
One of the primary consequences of living in crisis years in Greece is the changes observed in 
transactional behavior. The island of Crete is a popular destination for tourism, employment 
mobility, military personnel, student population with diversified economy. Its island dynamics 
offer a nice example for the use of language and nissology culture. It could be the best of times 
for cooperative banking, as the current crisis provided arguments against the dominant theory of 
perfect information and the capacities of self-regulating markets. The crisis has also provoked 
widespread rethinking about the potential contributions of credit in local development and the 
behavior of the local towards their transactions. Finally, it has highlighted the pressing need for 
local societies to work towards exerting control on the global and its self-organized governance. 
                                                 
4  
Jacques Rogge, President of International Olympic Committee, was quoted as saying: ‘These Games 
were unforgettable, dream Games,’ in his speech at the Closing Ceremony. He also thanked the  
‘marvellous volunteers who have charmed us with their confidence and kindness’ (Associated Press 
2004. HTTP: <http://sports.espn.go.com/oly/summer04/gen/news/story?id=1870458>). 
5  
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2004) ‘Consolidated KYC risk management’, Basel: Bank of 
International Settlements. Online HTTP: <http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs110.pdf> (accessed 15 June 
2012). 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 10ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 12-14 Νοεμβρίου 2015 
220 
Along these lines, philotimo is a value of personal honor and pride that massages empathy for 
the “other”, as expressed through acts of generosity and sacrifice. Greeks since antiquity put 
emphasis on integrity (akeraiotita), the primary layer of the modern philotimo.  Integrity originally 
reflected the public pressure to behave uprightly, a norm of the citizen. It would be unthinkable 
that someone without integrity - in terms of honesty, justice, truthfulness- is admired. Emphasis 
on goodness is encapsulated in the ancient inscription “kalos k’ agathos”6 on numerous Greek 
artifacts; it means, literally, “good and purely good” in person and good as a social being. One is 
esoteric for personal improvement, the other extrovert to the quality of social relations. Integrity 
as a purpose and criterion of good life survived in modern times in Greece as the proverbial 
philotimo, with a teleological perspective but a deontological rootage.  
Philotimo seems to gain the status of a collective conscience in modern Greece, where people 
no longer philosophize about it, or try to impose it on the masses, but take it for granted and 
assume its widespread existence7. That is the case of Crete, as an insular community 
constructed by scattered individual households with prowess to defend themselves against 
enemies. It is a society with a radical shame culture with a “what we are and what we stand for” 
lifeworld practice that also is represented in its ethical approach to banking8. The primary 
sanction that matters is “what people in the community will say”. 
At a community level when living in affinitive local societies, transactions in local banks during 
the crisis transform their cultural values to ethical – originally meaning daily-expected – traits 
when they decide to start doing business after assuming the membership experience9. This is an 
Aristotelian ideal that “we are what we repeatedly do”; ethos is a way of life diffused through the 
                                                 
6  
A full explanation is offered in Petrochilos, G. A. (2002), Kalokagathia: The Ethical Basis of Hellenic 
Political Economy and Its Influence from Plato to Ruskin and Sen, History of Political Economy, Vol 34, 
No 3, Duke University Press. 
7  
Several researchers document why, traditionally, in Greece philotimo is “taken for granted”: see [6], [7], 
[9], 
[10], 
[11]. 
Also: 
Kostoulas 
G. 
(2008), 
Philotimo 
and 
the 
Greek 
Manager 
at 
http://www.capital.gr/news.asp?Details=502016 ( accessed on 9/ 2009). Mavreas V., Bebbington P., Der 
Geoff (1989), The Structure and Validity of Acculturation Analysis of an Acculturation Scale, Social 
Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, No 24, pp. 233-240.  
8  
Brian Harvey (1995), Ethical Banking: The case of the Co-operative Bank, Journal of Business Ethics, p. 
1005-1013. 
9  
Geert Hofstede provides a well- documented analysis of cultural aspects in business in several 
publications and in his site at http://www.geert-hofstede.com/ (accessed on October 2013). 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 10ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 12-14 Νοεμβρίου 2015 
221 
cooperative network fabric. The core value of Greek “philotimo” safeguards integrity and 
performance in Cretan society, as an enthymeme of a social added-value. Greekness as 
identity10, manifested in Crete with philotimo, enriches transactional ethos with a social 
dimension that makes local banking ethical and a benefit dimension that makes it sustainable.  
Local cooperative banks, in such a context, adopted the definition of the International 
Cooperative Alliance (ICA) : “[a cooperative is] an autonomous association of persons united 
voluntarily to meet their common economic, social and cultural needs and aspirations through a 
jointly owned and democratically controlled enterprise.” Socially organized business finds an 
exemplary application in cooperative banking and institutionalizes philotimo in daily life  terms. 
The cooperative doctrine with seven internationally recognized principles that ICA11 labels as 
cooperative identity:  (i) voluntary and open membership, (ii) democratic control by members, (iii) 
member economic participation, (iv) education, training and information, (v)  cooperation among 
cooperatives, and concern for the community. These principles materialize the use of philotimo 
at an operational level. 
It is a typical example of an amalgam of social and value capital supported by a banking network 
with connected members in the local community. Market share is not a goal but an inevitable 
evolution of togetherness between locals in Crete. Most importantly, by encouraging people's 
input into the ongoing development of cooperative banks' ethical policy,  Homo Communicans 
forwards Homo Economicus to Homo Dictyous (a connected member). 
4   Globalized use of philotimo terminology 
The conceptualization of philotimo has become a story-telling narrative in major announcements, 
speeches, and occasions with international appeal when speaking about Greece. In this part, 
several examples of these uses articulate the advancement of term an entity synonymous to 
identity perception, formation, and sustainability. 
                                                 
10  Managerial and behavioral aspects of philotimo are explained in: Bourantas D. and Papadakis V. (1996), 
Greek Management, International Studies of  Management and Organization, Vol. 26, Issue 3, pp: 13-
32. Skiftou V. (2005), Within Social and Cultural Practices of Greek Society Subjects Negotiate a Series 
of Issues that are Related to Family and the Complexities of It, LSE Doctoral Conference. Vassiliou V. G. 
& Vassiliou G. (1973), The Implicative Meaning of the Greek Concept of Philotimo, Journal of Cross-
Cultural Psychology,  4(3). 
11  ICA definitions and principles are described in http://www.ica.coop/coop/principles.html (2013).  
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 10ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 12-14 Νοεμβρίου 2015 
222 
In the event of 2010 White House ceremony for the Greek Independence day US President 
Barak Obama chose to analyze philotimo as a virtue, cultural identifier and roadmap in collective 
life. That reception's  significance extends beyond the remembrance of Greek Independence 
Day, as Obama remarks on the enduring bond of USA and Greece forged by the shared history, 
common values, and the united obligation to build a better future [emphasis added to highlight 
key points]12: 
"There’s a concept that captures it, and it doesn’t translate easily; it doesn’t really 
have an equivalent in English.  But it’s a virtue that all of you know well, because it’s 
the very essence of being Greek -- and you will forgive if my pronunciation is just so-
so -- philotimo. Right?  Philotimo.  Literally, it translates as “love of honor.”  I love that 
concept -- love of honor.  But, of course, it means much more than that. It’s a sense 
of love, to family, and to community, and to country -- the notion that what we’re here 
on this Earth to do is to be all in this together.  We all have obligations to each other 
and to work together.  And so it was that the democratic example of a small group of 
city states more than 2,000 years ago could inspire the founding generation of this 
country, that led one early American to imagine that “the days of Greece may be 
revived in the woods of America.” 
Philotimo's semantics in the Presidential address show the essential attribute of being 
recognized as Greek, its connection with family structure, community building, togetherness,  
and the sense of respect. 
 One of the most prominent younger members of Greek- American business community, George 
Logothetis13, Chairman and CEO of Libra Group, outlined how the financial crisis in Greece is 
currently dominating the agenda and overlooks the problems people face in their everyday 
                                                 
12  It is noteworthy that Presidential staff has used data from the author's paper cited as "Katerinakis T., 
From Kalokagathia to Philotimo: Connected Ethics in Modern Greek Cooperatives (at It is notworthy that 
http://www.afglc.org/katerinakis_ppt_AFGLC_2010.pdf). 15th Annual AFGLC-ICHS Forum/Conference 
2010, “Hellenic Values in a Global Civilization: Engaging the Colleges, Universities and Citizens” USF, 
Tampa, February 18-20, 2010.And that paper received 50,000 downloads according to AFGLC's web 
administrator (at the time) Dr. Ulysses Ballis. 
13 Logothetis G. (2012). “What We Have Built Has Been Underwritten by Philotimo”. Libra Group 
presentation 
for 
Greece, 
2012 
National 
Innovation 
Conference 
in 
NYC. 
Available 
at 
http://www.greekamerica.org/nic/nic-talks/talks-2012/ 
(or 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pBEXkmNGgDE) 
- 
See 
more 
at: 
http://usa.greekreporter.com/2012/05/28/george-logothetis-what-we-have-built-has-been-underwritten-
by-philotimo/#sthash.td5IJBo4.dpuf. 
Logothetis 
data 
in 
Libra 
Group 
is 
available 
at 
http://www.libra.com/en/people/executive-team/george-m-logothetis. 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 10ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 12-14 Νοεμβρίου 2015 
223 
lives.”We keep hearing about the financial crisis but not the social one. We do not hear about the 
massive jump in suicides, the rise in homelessness, the practical unwinding of the social fabric of 
society,” he explained. In several og his talks and presentations, He identified how philotimo as 
a value is part of the Greek character and one he has seen over the years in every corner of his 
family’s business: 
 "To me, the undercurrent of Hellenism, the commonest and starkest theme that unites 
us all as Greeks, is philotimo… duty, loyalty, integrity, honor, love, trust, faith and, 
perhaps most important of all, the pride in being decent. The fabric of what we have 
built as a family and a group has been underwritten by philotimo.”   
Logothetis adds the dimension of corporate values and the expansion of philotimo in the 
professional world, as a determinant of a Greek professional with the creativity and care for 
entrepreneurial good beyond the individual.  
The Washington "Oxi Day Foundation" 14 is a nonprofit initiative founded in the US to promote 
the Greek resistance during WWII. On 2014 a whole campaign started with a video titled "The 
Greek Secret"; the video suggests that the secret to extraordinary Hellenic excellence – 
personally and as a people – may spring from the uniquely Greek word philotimo.   Arianna 
Huffington, George Stephanopoulos, Bob Costas and Greek Orthodox Archbishop of America 
Demetrios, and key business figures are among the nationally-known Greek-Americans who 
appear in this video. This video features interviews with 29 leading Hellenes who each share 
their definition of philotimo, as they understand it in the Greek language. Those interviewed 
defined philotimo as:  
"not only the “love of honor but also as finding pleasure in sacrificing for the good of 
others; doing the right thing; improving themselves and their families; and seeking to 
achieve respect and love from others... Philotimo may in great part explain the Greeks’ 
spectacular achievements throughout history, as well as their close family and 
community relationships".  
                                                 
14  The Washington Oxi Day Foundation (at http://www.oxidayfoundation.org/mission/#sthash.LKEE2fvU.dpuf) is a 
nonprofit, 501c3 organization dedicated to informing American policymakers and the public about the 
profound role Greece played in bringing about the outcome of World War II and celebrating modern day 
heroes who exhibit the same courage as the Greeks did in continuing to fight to preserve and promote 
freedom and democracy around the world - The so-called " philotimo" video is available at 
http://www.oxidayfoundation.org/philotimo-the-greek-secret-video/. 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 10ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 12-14 Νοεμβρίου 2015 
224 
The Foundation underlines that the video highlights such Hellenic achievements as: the 
miraculous leap forward that the ancient Greeks brought to humankind’s standard of living and 
freedom; Greece being identified by America, Great Britain and Russia as the only other country 
essential to the defeat of Hitler; the Greeks’ unsurpassed response to the Holocaust; and 
Hellenes alone in America’s 20th century rising from universal, uneducated poverty to ranking 
among the top in education and income. 
In this case, philotimo acquires a transformational function for the community and may help the 
Greek brand may be coming true15.  
On 2014 the "Stavros Niarchos Foundation" established the Annual Philotimo Award to 
recognize extraordinary acts of “philotimo” performed by everyday Greek citizens  who, despite 
the economic crisis, have rallied around others working to maintain social cohesion. In the case 
of Stavros Niarchos Foundation philotimo reflects back to society, as a collective voluntary duty 
for a common good. In the Foundation's documentation:  
"the Greek word “philotimo”  literally means ‘friend of honor’, however its definition 
encompasses multiple virtues such as decency, dignity, personal sacrifice, honesty, 
truthfulness, honor, courage, sense of duty, pride, love of family, country and 
humanity". 
Philotimo in this case has been recognized as a desired attribute, a goal empowered by explicit 
motivation promoted by this award on an annual basis. Acts of philotimo, activities and 
campaigns, voluntary contributions to a collective "self", common efforts and incentives are, 
among others, aspects of the semantic load of the original term. The emergence of a prize  in 
the nominal value of "philotimo" term forwards the use of the term in the additional dimension of 
an ideal situation.  
The last but not least in importance example is the so-called Philotimo foundation16. It is an 
undertaking following the realization of the systematic epistemological gap in current 
                                                 
15 See more at http://www.oxidayfoundation.org/philotimo-the-greek-secret-video/#sthash.xrTBMeXc.dpuf  
from Oxi Day Foundation Founder and President, Andrew Manatos. 
16 The story behind the philotimo initiative begins in London in 2011. Since that very first research idea of 
exploring or rediscovering the “lost philotimo”, as it’s often referred to by Greeks, begins an eventful path 
favored by illumined encounters and improbable coincidences that lead to the incorporation of the non-
profit center for social innovation in September 2014. Details at: http://philotimo.org/?lang=en 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 10ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 12-14 Νοεμβρίου 2015 
225 
international bibliography around the "complex and central to the Greek cultural identity, concept 
of philotimo", as noted in the Foundation's declaration. The Foundation's claim is that philotimo 
has its position in international in international dictionaries right under the word "philosophy". The 
first crucial step of this project involved the "opinion crowdsourcing", namely the international 
open invitation to provide contemporary definitions and stories on philotimo towards its universal 
understanding by Greeks and non-Greeks alike which was launched on 21 December 2014. The 
Foundation describes the theoretical socio-anthropological significance of investigating the term 
as follows (emphasis added on aspects of philotimo):  
"The specific case of esteem and importance attribute partakers of Greek language and 
culture where land is particularly valuable object of study since the oxymoron and 
identify complex traits such as gentleness, or condescension, selflessness even naivety 
on the one, and stubbornness, pride, or irritability or even eterodosolipsia other. Worthy 
of study and the evolutionary trend and plasticity concept pride seemed to show, when 
investing the period 1960-1970, where populations are rural areas of the country 
entered in the urban centers of the time by adopting, inter alia, more personalized and 
mature existential beliefs esteem, personal freedom and dignity in just a few 
months. Worth mentioning is the specificity of the term to negotiate uniquely pairing 
personal virtues such as honor integrity even pride – with more social values such as 
friendship, honesty in trade, and humanity. Besides their academic value, the above 
estimates of esteem exhibit specific innate behavior tendencies, thinking and feeling 
that are distinguished for their unique ability to enable and empower the person as to 
the optimal individual functionality and development." 
The Philotimo's Foundation initiative is based on a key policy shift of the humanities do employ 
systematic research and specific interventions in order to understand and serve people as 
integrated entities specified by pursuing their welfare, excellence and prosperity.  
In a recent book coming from the German world Andreas Deffner, a German Health Ministry 
executive, reviews current Greek reality with the "adventure, routine, and crisis" of philotimo. He 
goes one step further to provide a recipe metaphor for the multiple meanings and connotations 
of philotimo: "two or three positive thoughts, a litre of joy of life, 500 grams of hospitality, a whole 
ripe friendship, ten drops of helpfulness, a little pride, dignity and sense of duty." [37] 
5   Discussion and communication for "philotimo" and Greeks 
The traditional language relativity (known as Sapir-Whorf) hypothesis claims  that language we 
speak influences the thoughts we have; people speaking widely different languages will see the 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 10ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 12-14 Νοεμβρίου 2015 
226 
world differently and will think differently “dividing areas of experience in a variety of ways” [38]. 
Philotimo terminology and documentation seems to be compatible with the relative differentiation 
of the Greek spirit. It is a case of language liaison with persuasion (for the uniqueness of 
philotimo traits in Greek language and culture) and is measured with the following criteria [39]: 
• 
Intentionality: language focus is cautious and purposeful distinguished from social influence; 
it serves certain goals.   
• 
Effect: persuasion does not take place if no one is persuaded (the process continues). 
• 
 Free will and conscious awareness: language cultivates good practices and not coercive 
acts   
• 
Symbolic action: persuasion begins and ends with symbolic expression; i.e. language and 
meaningful acts.  
• 
Interpersonal and intrapersonal: the dyad is indispensible; language imposes self-
persuasion, rationalization and discipline, as the usual first step of perception. 
Language as a system of words, sounds, drawings and gestures in a standardized form 
incorporating four dimensions [40]: 
• 
Pragmatics: social context, assumptions, expectations and beliefs for all interlocutors. 
• 
Semantics: the meaning and knowledge of the signs. How do recipients connect signs with 
the interpretation of these signs? 
• 
Syntactics: the logic and grammar used for the construction and transmission of signs. 
• 
Empirics: the codes and the physical characteristics of signs and the various media of 
communication (e.g. pronunciation, legible gestures, proper wording).  
In Greek language philotimo has pragmatic, semantic and empirical dimensions depending on 
the syntax used. The dominant role of philotimo in encapsulating the perception of the Greek 
spirit connects terminology with story-telling with some basic framing inquiries:  (i) what 
does philotimo mean to you? (ii) what are some extraordinary examples of philotimo that you 
have seen? (iii) what are the things you can do in your daily life to exhibit philotimo? (iv) how 
can philotimo improve your life?  
Lastly, taking into account the argument of nation branding theory [41] that he only "remaining 
superpower is the international public opinion" philotimo may become a viable "export product" . 
Comparing the ingredients of philotimo with prevailing international concepts such as kindness, 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 10ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 12-14 Νοεμβρίου 2015 
227 
fairness, honesty, gratitude, courage and other, offers a field that could be exploited by helping 
to rebuild the international image of Greece. 
The last word comes from Nicholas J. and Anna K. Bouras Foundation Trustee, the Honorable 
Judge B. Theodore Bozonelis, who received the scholarship for Aristaia and Daria Pappas of La 
Habra, California. The 7th and 12th grade sisters spent most of their lives in a Russian 
orphanage. In their thanking note the text reads [emphasis on philotimo added]17: 
 “We are not Greek by blood…but we are Greek by philotimo…our parents came into 
our lives when we were lost and alone. They bestowed upon us all the things that 
meant the most to them: their culture; their traditions; their morals and their 
values, their philotimo. Now we know the meaning of the word philotimo and we can 
feel it too!”   
Philotimo is now elevated as equivalent to the value system of the Greek national character, as 
a word that you can feel and a semiotic identifier of Greekness [42]. Further work, especially in 
the branches of psychology and sociology, would reposition the focus of study to create positive 
development experiences and relationships, starting from the individual and going up to the 
collective and including the institutional state. 
6   Bibliography 
[ 1].  Pinker, S. (1995/2000), “The Language Instict- The new Science of Language and Mind” 
(To Glossiko Enstikto) Greek Translation for Katoptro Publications. 
[ 2].  Griffin E. A. (2006),. A First Look at Communication Theory, Sixth Edition, McGraw-Hill, 
USA (.Griffin for Mead, 2006, p. 56) 
[ 3].  Griffin E. A. (2006),. A First Look at Communication Theory, Sixth Edition, McGraw-Hill, 
USA (.Griffin for Blumer, 2006, p. 56) 
[ 4].  Kengor, P. (2004). God and Ronald Reagan: a spiritual life, New York: HarperCollins. 
[ 5]. Kernaghan K. (1995). Public administration in Canada: a text, 3rd edn, Toronto: Nelson 
Canada. 
[ 6].  Kourvetaris, G. A.(1971). Professional Self-Images and Political Perspectives in the Greek 
Military, American Sociological Review, Vol. 36, No. 6 , pp. 1043-1057.  
                                                 
17 Former Presidents of the United States and Israel Bill Clinton and Shimon Peres joined the growing 
number of world leaders and other opinion leaders in recognizing the Oxi Day story — the David vs. 
Goliath 
courage 
of 
the 
Greek 
people 
in 
WWII. 
- 
See 
more 
at: 
http://usa.greekreporter.com/2014/10/29/former-u-s-and-israel-presidents-help-resurrect-greek-oxi-day/. 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 10ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 12-14 Νοεμβρίου 2015 
228 
[ 7].  Vassiliou, G, & Vassiliou, V. (1966). Social values as psychodynamic vanables. Preliminary 
explorations of the semantics of philotimo, Acta Neurologica el Psychologica  Hellemka,   
Νο 5, pp. 121-135.   
[ 8]  Mavreas, V., Bebbington P., and Der, G. (1989). ‘The structure and validity of acculturation: 
analysis of an acculturation scale’, Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 24(5): 
233–40. 
[ 9]  Τriandis Harry C. (2000). Culture and Conflict, International Journal of Psychology, Vol. 35,  
No 2, pp. 145-152. 
[10]   Hoban, S. and Hoban, G. (2004) ‘Self-esteem, self-efficacy and self-directed learning: 
attempting to undo the confusion’, International Journal of Self-Directed Learning, 1(2): 7–
25. 
[11]  Koutsantoni, D. (2004). Relations of power and solidarity in scientific communities: A cross-
cultural comparison of politeness strategies in the writing of native English speaking and 
Greek engineers, Multilingua 23 (2004), pp.111-143 
[12]  Obama, B. (2010) ‘Remarks by the President Honoring Greek Independence Day’, White 
House Archives, 9 March 2010. Online. Available HTTP: 
<http://www.whitehouse.gov/photos-and-video/video/honoring-greek-independence-
day#transcript>(accessed 20 August 2011). 
[13] Devito, J. (2006),”Human Communication The Basic course” (10thed), Pearson, USA  
[14] Hofstede, G. (1997) ‘Riding the waves: a rejoinder’, International Journal of Intercultural 
Relations, 21(2): 287–90. 
[15] Shannon, C.E. (1948) ‘A mathematical theory of communication,’ Bell System Technical 
Journal, vol. 27: 379–423 and 623–56. 
[16] Petrochilos, G.A. (1999) ‘The Hellenic contribution to economic thought’, Global Business 
and Economics Review, 1(2): 215 –46. 
[17] Baeck, L. (1994). The Mediterranean Tradition in Economic Thought, London: Routledge. 
[18] Constantelos, D.J. (2005). Christian Faith and Cultural Heritage: essays from a Greek 
Orthodox perspective, Boston: Somerset Hall Press. 
[19] Ioannou, C.A. (2009). Managing Employment Relations in Greece: a guide for foreign 
managers, Athens: Kerkyra Publications. 
[20] Psaropoulos, J.(2009) ‘From Homer to co-ops, Business File Quarterly Review no.74:49–50.  
[21] Doukas, P. (2007) Oikonomikes Theories, Arches Dioikisis & Arhaia Elliniki Skepsi 
[Economic theories, governance values, and ancient Greek thought], Athens: Livanis 
Publications. 
[22] Habermas, J. (1996) ‘Discourse Ethics, from Moral Consciousness and Communicative 
Action’ in W. Outhwaite (ed.) The Habermas Reader, Cambridge: Polity Press, pp. 180–
192. 
[23] Held, D. (1980) Introduction to Critical Theory: Horkheimer to Habermas, Berkeley: 
University of California Press. 
[24] Clogg, R. (2002). A Concise History of Greece, 2nd edn, (Clogg 2002, 4-5).Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
[25] Hofstede, G. and Hofstede, G.J. (2005). Culture and Organizations: software of the mind, 
2nd edn, New York: McGraw-Hill.  
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 10ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 12-14 Νοεμβρίου 2015 
229 
[26] Salem, P. (2009). The Complexity of Human Communication. New York: Hampton Press. 
[27] Herzfeld, M. (1991). A Place in History: social and monumental time in a Cretan town, 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
[28] Campbell, J.K. (1964.) Honour, Family and Patronage. a study of institutions and moral 
values in a Hellenic Mountain community, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
[29] Lyberaki, A. and Paraskevopoulos, C. J. (2002). ‘Social Capital Measurement in Greece’, 
paper prepared for the OECD-ONS International Conference on Social Capital 
Measurement, London, 25–27 September. Online. Available HTTP: 
<http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/22/15/2381649.pdf> (accessed 29 September 2011). 
[30] Hofstede, G.J. (2009). ‘Research on cultures: how to use it in training?’, European Journal 
of Cross-Cultural Competence and Management, 1(1): 14–21. 
[31] Shahîd, I. (2009). Byzantium and the Arabs in the Sixth Century: economic, social, and 
cultural history, Vol. 2, Part 2, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
[32] Van Eck, C. (2003). Purified by Blood: honour killings amongst Turks in the Netherlands, 
Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press. 
[33] Christakis, N.A. and Fowler, J.H. (2009). Connected: the surprising power of our social 
networks and how they shape our lives, New York: Little, Brown. 
[34] Gilmore, D.D. (1982). ‘Anthropology of the Mediterranean area’, Annual Review of 
Anthropology, vol. 11:175–205. 
[35] Vakalopoulos, A. E. and Vakalopoulos, K.A (eds) (2003). ‘O Haraktiras ton Ellinon: 
Anihneyontas tin Ethniki mas Taytotita. Ereyna, Porismata, Didagmata [The Character of 
Greeks: tracing our national identity—investigation, lessons, and findings]’, Thessaloniki, 
Greece: Ant. Stamoulis Publications. 
[36] Social Issues Research Centre (2007) ‘Belonging’, Oxford: SIRC. Online. Available HTTP: 
< http://www.sirc.org/publik/Belonging.pdf#search="belonging" > (accessed 18 August 
2011). 
[37] Deffner A. (2012). Filotimo - Abenteuer, Alltag und Krise in Griechenland. Grössenwahn 
Verlag, Frankfurt, Germany. 
[38  Whorf, B. L. (1956).“Language, Thought and Reality” (ed.J. B.Carroll). Cambridge, MA:MIT 
Press, USA 
[39] Gass R.H., Seiter J. S. (2007) “Persuasion Social Influence and Compliance Gaining”, 
Third Edition, Pearson Education, USA  
[40] Avgerou C., Cornford T. (1993): “Developing Information Systems”, MacMillan Press, 
London, UK 
[41] Anholt, S. (2009). Places: Identity, Image and Reputation, Palgrave Macmillan 
[42] Adamopoulos, J., (1977).The dimensions of the Greek concept of philotimo. The Journal of 
Social Psychology, Vol 102(2), 313-314.  
 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 10ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 12-14 Νοεμβρίου 2015 
230 
Appendix: English to Greek Glossary 
Basic Term in English 
Βασικός Όρος στο Ελληνικά 
betweenness 
μεταξύτητα 
brotherless nation 
έθνος ανάδελφον 
enculturation 
ενδο-κοινωνικοποίηση 
floating signifier 
κυλιόμενος σημαίνον όρος 
freedom 
ελευθερία 
homo communicans 
επικοινωνιακός άνθρωπος 
homo dictyous 
δικτυακός άνθρωπος 
homo oeconomicus, 
οικονομικός άνθρωπος 
homo reciprocans 
ανταποδοτικός άνθρωπος 
Institutionalization 
θεσμοποίηση 
language relativity 
γλωσσική σχετικότητα 
lifeworld practice 
πρακτική και αλληλεπίδραση βιό-
κοσμου 
morality contagion 
μετάδοση ηθικής 
Nissology 
νησολογία 
opinion crowdsourcing 
πληθοπορισμός γνώμης 
profiteering  
αισχροκέρδεια 
self-fulfilling prophecy 
αυτοεκπληρούμενη προφητεϊα 
social justice 
κοινωνική δικαιοσύνη 
the ‘know your customer’ (KYC) principle 
αρχή ΅γνώρισε τον πελάτη σου΅ 
 
 
 
Dr. Theodoros Katerinakis 
Adjunct Faculty, Drexel University 
E-mail: tk325@drexel.edu  
 
 
 
 
