SOURCE: https://eleto.gr/en/eleto-elot-tc21-edo-conference-on-terminology-8-november-2018/#content

October 8, 2018
Conference invitation
Terminology and terminology resources – Requirements for modern Greek scientific terminology and necessity to activate the experts
8 November 2018
Invitation to representatives of scientific and professional bodies
What is
terminology
(the terms) and what
Terminology
(the science)? Why do we need terms? Is there a reason for Greek terminology (Greek terms)? Does Terminology have principles and rules? How significant is to develop Greek terminology? What is the relationship of Terminology with language and linguistic issues? Which is it’s relationship with translation? Who are involved in Terminology? Are there cooperation possibilities?
Come and discuss about Terminology and terminology; about existing needs and problems. Let us search together and agree on cooperation ways.
The Hellenic Society for Terminology (ELETO), the Technical Committee ELOT/TC21 “Terminology – Language resources” and Hellenic Network of Terminology (EDO) organize a conference on:
“Terminology and terminology resources – Requirements for modern Greek scientific terminology and necessity to activate the experts”
The purpose of the conference is to present the general issues about Terminology as encountered by the above bodies–organizers today and, mainly, to discuss about the problems and the needs for special scientific terminology, as well as about proposals for cooperation and coordination of scientific and professional bodies and for the utilization of terms that have been produced, or are produced, in the framework of Hellenic standardization.
The conference will be on
Tuesday, 8 November
at the Conference room of Technical Chamber of Greece (Nikis 4, Syntagma Square, Athens) at 8.00-14.30.
Please inform us for your participation in the conference until Friday, 26 October 2018:
either fill in the relevant form (form removed)
or sending an e-mail at valeonti@otenet.gr providing the following data (those with asterisk are required).
Full name*
E-mail address*
Postal address
Phone
Specialty*
Body represented*
Last updated on October 22, 2022
Post navigation
Previous Post
20 June 2014: End of Public Enquiry of the Hellenic Standard ELOT 1445: “Evaluation of terminological resources – General concepts, principles and requirements”
Next Post
Third Wrocław Terminological Meeting TERMOS 2023