SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/ELETO-EAFT_Conference_2013-11-07/ELETO-EAFT-Symposium-2013_Delyth%20Prys_Paper_EN.pdf

EAFT–ELETO Symposium 
“National Languages and Terminology  
in Higher Education, Science & Technology” 
Athens, Greece, 7 November 2013 
 
Summary about the status of their national language as  
instruction language in the universities in Wales 
Delyth Prys 
 
Contrary to the situation of national languages as an instruction language in most other European 
countries in recent years, the story of Welsh as a medium of instruction has been one of growth and 
renaissance. Admittedly this has been from a very low starting base, since Welsh as a minority 
language was not widely used as a teaching medium at university level for most of the twentieth 
century. Apart from teaching Welsh itself as an academic subject, there was some activity in teaching 
through the medium of Welsh in subjects where Welsh traditionally had a strong presence, in History, 
Theology and Music, but even this was confined to some universities in north and west Wales, where 
the language was strongest. Often, it was left to individual lecturers to teach through the medium of 
Welsh if they wanted, but this would have been  in addition to their normal (English medium) 
workload.  
This situation changed dramatically in 2011 with the establishment of Y Coleg Cymraeg Cenedlaethol, 
the Welsh-medium National College. This is a virtual college, with a presence distributed across all 
the universities in Wales, dedicated to Welsh-medium teaching and research. It is funded by the 
Welsh Government through the Higher Education Funding Council for Wales (HEFCW). The political 
reasons for its founding are threefold, namely: 
• 
the parent-ledincrease in demand for Welsh-medium teaching within the school system in 
Wales catering for 5-19 year olds, leading to pressure to provide post-19 education in Welsh 
also 
• 
the Welsh Language Act of 1993 and subsequent legislation providing greater legal rights 
and protection for the Welsh language 
• 
the establishment of  devolved government for Wales in 1998, giving Wales autonomy over 
education in Wales. 
The decision to distributeWelsh-medium provision throughout all Welsh universities, rather than 
concentrate it on one geographic site, was also a political one, based on the fact that all the 
universities wanted a share of the new funding, whether they had supported Welsh-medium teaching 
activities in the past or not. It is also facilitated by the availability of new technology to share resources 
and teaching across different geographical locations, thereby achieving economies of scale. 
The Coleg’s national strategy is underpinned by numerous policy documents, including itsacademic 
development plan. This sets out to offer comprehensive coverage of academic subjects in Welsh, 
grouped together under four grand themes: Arts and Humanities; Social Sciences, Business and Law; 
Health and Social Care; and Sciences. In at least one instance, that of Philosophy, it has resurrected 
an academic discipline which had ceased to be taught in Welsh universities in either language. It is 
not possible in every instance to offer a full degree course through the medium of Welsh, but the 
provision of at least 40 credits (out of a 120 credits for a full degree) is encouraged through funding 
mechanisms. Post-graduate scholarship through the medium of Welsh is also funded, both at Masters 
and PhD level, and the emphasis is on producing a new generation of Welsh scholars able to lecture, 
write and research through the medium of Welsh. 
To deliver this strategy, a hundred posts for Welsh –medium academics across all disciplines will be 
created by 2015, together with 40 research scholarships. A large number of undergraduate burseries 
are also given out annually to students studying all, or part, of their courses, through the medium of 
Welsh.  
Underpinning this development of Welsh-medium education at university is the parallel development 
of resources, such as a national portal for delivery o electronic teaching materials, video conferencing 
suites for distance learning, a peer-reviewed multi-disciplinary Welsh language academic journal, and, 
of special interest to us in EAFT, terminology standardization. 
 
Statement on the need to understand the importance of multilingual instruction for 
innovative, conceptual thinking in research and science 
Traditionally, the argument put forward for teaching through the medium of Welsh has been the 
student’s right to be educated in their own language. More recently, at least in Wales, it has been 
argued strongly that university education through our national language is needed to underpin the 
new national bilingual policies of government. Thus we need policemen, lawyers, teachers, social 
workers, civil servants, environment officers, and all those professions who come in contact with the 
public, to be able to deliver services in both Welsh and English. This has been a strong driving force 
for the establishment of Welsh-medium courses at university level. 
I put to you however that there is a third, very strong reason, why we need to promote teaching and 
research through all our own national languages at the university level, rather than let English 
predominate. That reason is the conceptual health of humanity. As a terminologist, I know very well 
that not all concepts are understood in the same way across different languages. The differences may 
be subtle, it may involve a different part of speech, a different grammar construction, a different way 
of grouping things, as well as more obvious differences where some concepts only have names in 
one or a small number of languages. 
Different ways of seeing things, different ways of expressing things, are at the deepest levels of 
innovation and cutting edge research. Einstein understood this well, and worried that he was missing 
something in his quest to unravel the great fundamental mysteries of physics, because of the way his 
thinking was constrained by both is native German and by English. His fellow physicist, Neils Bohr, 
from Denmark, also worried about this: 
“European languages, [Bohr] noted, perfectly mirror the classical world of Newtonian physics. When 
we say "the cat chases the mouse" we are dealing with well-defined objects (nouns), which are 
connected via verbs. Likewise, classical physics deals with objects that are well located in space and 
time, which interact via forces and fields. But if the world doesn't work the way our language does, 
advances are inevitably hindered.” 
 
“Bohm pointed out that quantum effects are much more process-based, so to describe them 
accurately requires a process-based language rich in verbs, and in which nouns play only a 
secondary role.”(Quoted from David Peat, New Scientist, 05/01/2008). 
A world in which all new scientific knowledge was created in English would be a very impoverished 
world, in the same way as a world dominated by growing only a few agricultural crops would be 
impoverished. We understand very well the arguments for biological diversity in plant life, we also 
need to understand the arguments for conceptual and therefore linguistic diversity in academic life. 
I will end with the words of William Salesbury, the great Welsh Renaissance scholar, who wrote in 
1547 (I translate from the Welsh):Ifyou do not wish to be worse than animals . . . 
obtainlearninginyourown language; ifyou do not wish to be more unnatural than anyothernationunder 
the sun, loveyour language and thosewholoveit. 
Note 
For Y Coleg Cymraeg Cendlaethol see their bilingual website http://www.colegcymraeg.ac.uk/en/. 
Their learning portal may be found at https://www.porth.ac.uk/en/.  
 
Delyth Prys 
Prifysgol Bangor/Bangor University 
Wales, UK 
