SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/6th%20Conference/6th_21-13-BertacciniFranco-BertozziBenedettaPaper_V04.pdf

ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
 
1
21   Italian-Hellenic Chamber of Commerce of Thessaloniki: an Italian-
Greek-English Socioterminological Study 
 
Benedetta Bertozzi, Franco Bertaccini 
 
ABSTRACT 
The purpose of this study is to comparatively analyse the main socioterminological trends related to the 
Institution of the Italian Chamber of Commerce in three languages: Italian, Greek and English. 
n particular, the domain the project is focused on refers to the terminology contained in the Italian-
Hellenic Chamber of Commerce of Thessaloniki website and in the bilingual publications of the above-
mentioned body.  
 
Chambre de Commerce Italo-Hellènique de Salonique : une étude 
socioterminologique dans les langues Italienne, Grecque et Anglaise 
 
Benedetta Bertozzi, Franco Bertaccini 
RÉSUMÉ 
Le but de cette étude réside dans la volonté d’effectuer une analyse comparée, en trois langues (grec, 
italien et anglais), des principales tendances au niveau socioterminologique dans le cadre de 
l’Institution de la Chambre de Commerce italienne.  
En particulier, le domaine retenu pour ce projet porte sur la terminologie utilisée dans le site web de la 
Chambre de Commerce Italo-grecque de Salonique et dans les publications bilingues de ce même 
organisme.  
 
 
1   Introduction 
The present terminological study has been inspired by the apprenticeship I served at the 
Italian-Hellenic Chamber of Commerce of Thessaloniki. Being a bridge institution between 
two countries, the Chamber of Commerce was the ideal setting where to deal 
simultaneously with the specific terminology of the sector in two languages: Greek and 
Italian. The purpose of this study is to provide an overview of the neological trends, in 
particular concerning the use of the abbreviations and the loanwords in the analysed 
languages, and the social trends in terms of diastratic variation. 
It is worth highlighting that the decision to include English language in the project and, 
primarily in the terminological corpora, fulfils two main fundamental needs: the first one is a 
direct consequence of the loanword analysis. Indeed most of the loanwords (both semantic 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
 
2
and morphological) analysed in the corpora proved to be imported from English. Therefore, 
it was necessary to provide the user with an English version of the final database in order to 
have a reference version of the studied phenomena.  
The second reason to create the English version of the database serves the purpose to 
create a consultation tool that can tangibly meet the needs of the users who have 
terminological and linguistic doubts and, above all, to increase the availability and 
usefulness of this study. 
2   Corpora and terminological extraction  
 The reference texts for the creation of the Italian and Greek corpora are the website pages 
of the Italian-Hellenic Chamber of Commerce, while the localization of the English parallel 
texts focused on the website of the same Italian institution in English-speaking countries, in 
order to collect the most relevant texts in terms of textual genres and communicative 
purpose of the above-mentioned corpora. The English equivalents of the terms that 
compose the database were extracted from the Italian Chamber of Commerce website in 
United Kingdom, United States of America and Australia. 
It should be stressed that we made an important methodological choice with a view to the 
corpora creation: to collect heterogeneous source texts. Someone, reading the above-listed 
websites, could claim that we selected “dangerous” texts due to their composition, but we 
must acknowledge that, even if we were aware of the potential risks, such a choice was 
extremely useful for a socioterminological study. These texts are addressed to multiple and 
varied target readers.  Really the different sections of the Italian-Hellenic Chamber of 
Commerce website are thought for a general audience that seek practical information, for 
those who approach this institution for the first time and ignore its specific competences, for 
sector specialists like entrepreneurs and agents interested in new trade opportunities and 
importers-exporters who need accounting and legal information. 
Consequently, to this user mulltiplicity corresponds a multiplicity of texts and particularly of 
terminological sub-domains (related to the main one), which differ considerably in 
specialization degree, text genre and, obviously, in linguistic register. The above-explained 
corpora heterogeneity plays a fundamental role in researching the diastratic variants of the 
examined domain. Moreover, also Maria Teresa Cabré [2003:179] mentions this feature 
among the reasons, which, in her opinion, underpin a new theory of the Terminology instead 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
 
3
of the General Theory of Terminology  by Wuster, because it is not  structured enough to 
achieve a comprehensive description of the terms: 
En quinto lugar porque su corpus de observación es totalmente homogéneo, con lo que no 
puede dar cuenta de la variedad que se produce tanto desde la observación de ámbitos 
temáticos distintos, como desde la inclusión en el corpus de datos procedentes de corpus 
de naturaleza real, no normalizados.   
Maria Teresa Cabré [2003:179] suggests which kind of texts a corpora aiming at an “in vivo” 
(i.e. in their actual discourse operating) term analysis should contain, as follows:  
Para ello debemos incluir producciones que sean [...] en situaciones de distinto nivel de 
formalidad y de grado de abstracción o nivel de especialidad diferente (discurso altamente 
especializado, medianamente especializado, discurso de divulgación científica) y de 
distintas funciones, o mejor dicho con valores distintos de las funciones que un discurso 
especializado puede tener (función informativa, función didáctica, directiva, evaluativo, etc.). 
We here below include a diagram of the sub-domains that make up the domain: 
In the first 1st degree sub-domain (“Organization chart and internal organization”) the terms 
refer to the institutional positions and the competence subdivision inside the Chamber of 
Commerce. Then, the second 1st degree sub-domain (“Chamber activities”) is more 
Italian-Hellenic Chamber of
Commerce of Thessaloniki
Organization chart and
internal organization
    Chamber Activities
  Observatory
      on the
   Balkans
      Fairs
    Provided
    Services
   Guidelines
         for
entrepreneurs
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
 
4
complex and it contains most of the information regarding the provided services and the 
dossiers for the users.  Now let us consider the 2nd sub-domains, the one called "Provided 
Services” is both general and specialized and it addresses specialist and no-specialist 
readers. Hence, it contains highly specialized terms and specialized terms that make 
already part of the general language. This phenomenon should be anything but unexpected; 
indeed it is a very common trend, as Maria Teresa Cabré [2003:183] points out:  
Ello nos ha llevado a formular el postulado del “valor especializado”: las llamadas unidades 
terminológicas, usadas en los ámbitos de especialidad, y las palabras usadas en contextos 
generales pueden explicarse  a partir de una misma unidad de base, la unidad léxica. Una 
unidad especializada se convierte en una unidad de conocimiento especializado, es decir, 
adquiere valor especializado, cuando en un discurso de determinadas características se 
activa un contenido preciso.   
On the other hand, in the sub-domains “Fairs”, “Guidelines for entrepreneurs” and 
“Observatory on the Balkans” there is only extremely specialized terminology, in particular 
belonging to the economic, tax and legal fields.  
With reference to the 2nd degree sub-domain “Observatory on the Balkans”, the presence of 
this section in the Chamber of Commerce website depends on a peculiar geopolitical 
situation in the examined region. Indeed Thessaloniki in particular, and Macedonia in 
general border on the Balkans and this Greek region is considered as the anteroom to these 
countries. So this factor makes potential Hellenic-Italian partnerships acquire an added 
value in terms of trade possibilities, because they may result in projects conceived for the 
Balkans as it has already occurred and still happens.  
Therefore, leaving out this aspect during the analysis of the domain and its terminology 
would turn out to be the cause of a limited and inaccurate work. Moreover, since the project 
intends to be an operational tool for the studied institution, in order to be useful and reliable 
the database must necessarily include all the components and the sectors of action of the 
Chamber of Commerce itself. 
Before rounding off this section, we should mention also the other sources we used for the 
terminological extraction: the four-month bilingual journal “Notizie italoelleniche” published 
by the Italian-Hellenic Chamber of Commerce of Thessaloniki, the Italian journal “Business 
Italia 2004” by the Italian  Ministry of Economy and Finance (Tax Policy Department) and the 
monthly “Eureka” published in Athens. 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
 
5
3   Conceptual tree diagrams 
After creating the above-described corpora, we extracted the candidate terms and then we 
identified the conceptual relations among the terms. The following step consisted in studying 
the linguistic relations that connect the vedette terms with their variants and finally we drew 
the diagrams. The diagrams we designed are divided into two types [Meyer 1994:7]. 
The first one provides an overview of the sub-domain to be analysed and the conceptual 
relations are marked with different colours according to the legend in each table. On the 
other hand, he second one contains detailed parts of the general diagrams. On the arrows 
linking the term there are some “satellites”, where the relation between two terms is 
indicated explicitly. This binomial enables us to explain the sub-domain clearly and it allows 
the user to look the semantic relations up quickly and effectively, so that these relations 
become transparent also for a not-specialist audience. Before giving an example of an ad-
hoc tree diagram designed for this domain, it is advisable to make a few remarks aiming at 
reaffirming the importance of this key phase in terminological research, as Lucia Fabbri 
[2005:7] appropriately claimed: 
Si words are the living things with then power to move1 la finalidad del modelo de análisis y 
de representación de los sistemas conceptuales debe ser la comprensión y no la 
clasificación. El modelo debe ayudar a comprender, que es ayudar a identificar, analizar, 
organizar, alertar, alterar, comparar, decidir y en todo momento ser dueños del proceso. El 
modelo debe permitir realizar y distinguir estas operaciones. 
The above-mentioned opinion is worth being considered, if we assume that in terminology 
the terms are “unidades de conocimiento (M.T.Cabré), unidades de comunicación 
especializada (M.T.Cabré) o units of understanding (R. Temmerman)”2, because, 
conversely, the terminological study would be a mere recording and cataloguing of terms 
that belong to a same domain. It is undeniable that, carrying out an analysis of the terms at a 
comprehensive semantic and linguistic level, the socioterminological perspective is a 
condition sine qua non. Indeed if the ultimate objective of the terminologist is to provide an 
overall overview of the terminology of a specific domain, it is impossible to leave the concept 
of variant out of consideration, otherwise the value of the study would be jeopardized. 
                                                 
1  
Rita Temmerman, Towards New Ways of Terminology, John Benjamins Publishing Company, 2000, 
258. 
2  
Lucia Fabbri, “Mutatis Mutandis”, Riterm, 2005, 1-03, 22. 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
 
6
This approach implies the need for the terminologist to ask oneself  many questions at each 
step on all the slightest nuances of the terms, intended as vehicle of meaning and  illocutory 
acts, that are able to influence the speaker and characterize specific social groups 
(according to age, geographical origin, social background, etc):  
High-quality concept-analysis is a sine qua non for high-quality terminology work: without 
understanding of the conceptual structures underlying the domain, the terminologist cannot 
properly carry out many of the practical tasks related to the production of a vocabulary. 
This opinion diverges remarkably from the Felber’s and Wuster’s theories according to 
which the term comes before the concept and, as a consequence, diamesic and diastratic 
variants do not exist. If we look closer at the conceptual diagrams, we notice that the use of 
the tree diagrams allows hierarchizing the terms and thus to identify unequivocally the 
domain and the sub-domains for the reasons outlined by Dubuc [1992:39]: 
I sistemi concettuali arborescenti rappresentano quasi sempre strutture concettuali 
gerarchiche (dove dominano le relazioni gerarchiche e meronimiche). In questi sistemi la 
parte superiore del grafico serve soprattutto per indicare i domini e sotto-domini della 
ricerca. La parte medio-bassa contiene la maggior parte dei termini più importanti del 
dominio. In altre parole al parte alta dell’albero serve a colocare il lavoro nel quadro del 
campo specialistico considerato. La parte bassa serve per strutturare la ricerca dei termini e 
permette di classificare i concetti sevcondo le loro caratteristiche. 
Our terminological trees are both poli-hierarchical and mixed, in other words, respectively, 
they are systems that “ofrecen la posibilidad de combinar un tipo de característica con otro 
empleando simultáneamente características de ordenación” [H. Felber & H. Picht; 1984:192] 
and “aquellos en los que se han combinado varias relaciones. De esta manera se amplia 
considerablemente la expresividad de un sistema, ya que caben en el mismo sistema 
concepto de distinta índole que no se pueden juntar al emplear una sola relación” [H. Felber 
& H. Picht; 1984:204]. This is particularly clear in the following example where different 
relations are used simultaneously, as indicated in the legend: 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
 
7
LEGENDA
Tavola 4 – Ricerca 
partner commerciali
DOMINIO
SOTTODOMINIO DI I GRADO
SOTTODOMINIO DI II GRADO
TERMINE
IPONIMO
SEQUENZIALE (ASSOCIATIVA)
MERONIMO
CAUSA/EFFETTO
SINONIMO
Camera di
Commercio
Italo-Ellenica
di Salonicco
Attività
camerale
Servizi erogati
Ricerca partner
commerciali
Partner
commerciale
Importatore
Importazioni
Esportatore
Esportazioni
concessionario
distributore
Distribuzione
Concessionario
esclusivo
Cliente
Agente
Commerciante
all’ingrosso
Commerciante al
dettaglio
Licenza
Vendita
all’ingrosso
Vendita al dettaglio
Licenza di
importazione
Licenza di
esportazione
Affiliato
Affiliazione
commerciale
(franchising)
RELAZIONE CONCETTUALE
SUBJECT/ACTIVITY
Among the hierarchical conceptual relations we pointed out, there is a marked 
preponderance of the meronimic and hyponimic ones, while, for the not-hierarchical 
relations, we decided to create the new following definitions and employ them in our trees: 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
 
8
- 
Object-operation: it refers to the activities undertaken by the Chamber of 
Commerce of Thessaloniki, considered as a service provider. 
- 
Sequential (associative): it points out a connection between two terms that share 
an associative relation such as exhibitor-stand. 
- 
Subject-activity: it is the equivalent of the object-operation relation but referred to 
animate subjects. 
- 
Phenomenon- measurement: it indicates the basic reference parameter to perform 
a specific calculation or measurement (i.e. the tax burden is calculated on the basis 
of the  taxable base) 
- 
Process-object: it refers to an object that is necessary to carry out an operation (i.e. 
the tax allowance is a crucial factor to quantify the tax base) 
4   Terminological Sheets 
The terminological sheets, in addition to the commonly included fields (definition, context, 
grammatical notes, etc) include new linguistic and semantic fields: synonyms, pseudo-
synonyms, acronyms, abbreviations and initials; hyponyms, super ordinates, holonyms, 
isonyms, not-assimilated loanwords and assimilated loanwords. 
5   Loanwords, abbreviations and variants  
The socioterminological approach is closely bound to social phenomena and their 
repercussions on linguistic and terminological level. Therefore, in the study of the 
terminological variants we cannot undermine the effects of the knowledge spread and 
circulation, which in the last few years have reached extraordinary proportions. The 
language, which is the tangible expression of the knowledge and its transmission vehicle, 
has been considerably affected by these changes. When this trend crossed the national 
borders and this exchange took place among speakers of different languages, inevitably 
new linguistic trends emerged. In particular we will focus on the not-assimilated loanwords. 
The uneven distribution of technical and scientific development and the imbalances in terms 
of economic power in the world led to the appearance of some dominant languages, both in 
general and specialized communication. The languages spoken in the countries at the 
cutting edge in the technical-scientific research coined new concepts and words, which have 
been exported and used by other language speakers by starting up a contamination 
phenomenon that poses new challenges to linguists and terminologist. 
Analysing the loanwords of our corpora, we notice that both Italian and Greek use English 
loanwords. In a research by Adamo e Della Valle, the English influence proved to be 
significant in particular in compound nouns; moreover, only a few English forming particles 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
 
9
combine with a large number of Italian words by creating determinant+determined hybrid 
compounds typical of English3 language. The amount of not-assimilated loanwords is far 
higher than the amount of other loanwords, due to the fact that the integral loanwords meet 
multiple needs. Some are justified because they belong to specialized domains and they are 
characterized by the “monoreferentiality of their use”, whereas others depend on a growing 
trend according to which the English term has an increased stylistic value and higher 
prestige than the national equivalent. 
Concerning this aspect, it is worth mentioning the so-called Analogue Rule coined by 
K.Valeontis [2006:10], according to which “when forming a term in a target language in order 
to name a new concept that has been primarily named in the source language, the namer’s 
first choice should be to apply a term-formation mechanism analogous to the term-formation 
mechanism used for the source language term”. 
In our reference corpora there are some examples of the phenomena we outlined so far. In 
some cases both Italian and Greek use English loanwords such as mailing e joint ventures. 
Regarding the latter, we would like to make a few interesting remarks, the most accredited  
Greek equivalents of  joint ventures are κοινοπραξία and κοινή επιχείρηση, whose reliability 
is 3 according to EU inter-institutional terminology database (IATE). Also the ΛΕΞΙΚΟ 
ΟΙΚΟΝΟΜΙΚΩΝ ΟΡΩΝ4 mentions both the terms as equivalent of the English loanword.  
The presence of the not-assimilated loanwords, neither at orthographical level, in our 
corpora serves on a specific communicative purpose. 
The use of the not-assimilated loanword, in fact, may depend on the need of transparency 
and monoreferentiality, which are guaranteed by the employment of the English term, 
although there is a reliable Greek equivalent. Another example of not-assimilated loanword 
is franchising, it is used both in Greek and in Italian, in the latter the ‘geolectal’ variant 
affiliazione commerciale is less frequent and the re is no accredited Italian equivalent for the 
derived term franchisee, excepting the term affiliato that is used in “Fare Affari in Grecia- 
Guida all’imprenditore” [2006:48]. In the guidelines the term franchising appears 27 times 
and, only the first time it is mentioned, it is followed by the geolectal variant in to bracket 
(affiliazione commerciale).A similar phenomenon exists also in Greek, where franchising is 
commonly 
used, 
even 
by 
the 
Greek 
National 
Association 
of 
Franchising 
                                                 
3  
Susanna Soglia, La terminologia come supporto alla traduzione: metodologie, applicazioni e 
prospettive future, S.S.L.M.I.T.- Università di Bologna, 2000, 548. 
4  
ΛΕΞΙΚΟ ΟΙΚΟΝΟΜΙΚΩΝ ΟΡΩΝ4, ΜΑΛΛΙΑΡΗΣ-ΠΑΙΔΕΙΑ Α.Ε., 2000. 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
 
10
(www.franchising,gr). The term has been normalized by Greek language till it acquired the 
same reliability as the Greek equivalent, confirming that IATE assigned to it a 3 reliability as 
to its equivalents παραχώρηση προνομίου e δικαιόχρηση. 
To conclude this brief overview on the loanwords in our corpora, we illustrate a 
representative example of the normalizing approach of Greek language. This analysis is 
considerably interesting also for the fact that it focuses on a language, which has not a Latin 
alphabet; therefore, it is possible to examine the transliteration of the loanwords in the Greek 
alphabet that is the first assimilation step of a borrowing. For instance, if we consider the 
term leasing, in Italian it has been imported without being assimilated, while in Greek both 
the transliterated variant λήζινγκ and the Greek χρηματοδοτικη μίσθωσι are awarded with 
the same reliability (i.e. 3) by IATE. 
Our research deals also with abbreviations (initialisms and acronyms). In our reference 
corpora we identified a large amount of these forms, and we provide some examples: Gross 
domestic product: (English GDP, Italian PIL ; Greek ΑΕΠ); Ordinary partnership (English 
OP, Italian S.N.C., Greek Ο.Ε); Limited partnership: English LP, Italian S.A.S, Greek Ε.Ε. In 
our opinion, these forms- all the types of abbreviations- can be considered as synonym of 
the extended form both at interlinguistic and intralinguistic level and, Owing to the evaluation 
of the trend and use frequency at socioterminological level, we fully agree with Cabrè 
[1993:217] when she claims that there is a synonymic relation between the abbreviation and 
the correspondent extended form that designate the same concept. There is a diametrically 
opposed theory to this one, stating that the abbreviations just accomplish the task to remind 
the extended form.5 
For instance, if we consider the compound società in nome collettivo, we observe that  it is 
more frequent in “Fare Affari in Grecia- Guida all’imprenditore“, which is a specialized 
publication, while S.N.C. is more frequent in the articles of the Chamber of Commerce 
Journal (general language publication) and in the spoken language. Thus, we should admit 
that the two forms unquestionably differ from usage context, social status and pragmatic 
purpose; however we cannot they that are variants of the same terms, otherwise, we 
jeopardize the concept itself of variant.  
 
                                                 
5  
Ana María Cardero, “Abreviaturas, Acrónimos, Siglas y Símbolos en los vocabularios 
especializados. Una propuesta”, Riterm, 2006, 2-07, 10 
ELETO – 6th Conference «Hellenic Language and Terminology» 
Athens, GREECE, 1-3 November 2007 
 
 
11
6   Conclusions 
In conclusion our study analysed the creation process of a terminological database about a 
specific domain in order to provide practical suggestions on the key phase of this work, 
particularly the systematization of the conceptual relations with a view to the intralinguistic 
variant and the interlinguistic equivalent identification in a socioterminological perspective. 
Moreover it demonstrates that a terminological research aiming at the harmonization of the 
terms of a specific domain must take into account those aspects that are closely connected 
with the term usage in particular the speakers, who are markedly different in social 
background, specialization degree, geographical position and age. Therefore, to create 
reliable and valuable tools, terminology should draw from the sociological knowledge to 
achieve a synergy, whose outcome is a thorough term analysis. Furthermore, terminology 
should accept the challenge to take a huge step forward till it reaches the imperceptible 
border of knowledge branches that permeate each others and whose ultimate objective is to 
study a complex and rich microcosm: the term. 
7   Bibliography 
[1] 
Rita Temmerman, Towards New Ways of Terminology, John Benjamins Publishing 
Company, 2000, 258. 
[2] 
Lucia Fabbri, “Mutatis Mutandis”, Riterm, 2005, 1-03, 22. 
[3] 
Ana María Cardero, “Abreviaturas, Acrónimos, Siglas y Símbolos en los vocabularios 
especializados. Una propuesta”, Riterm, 2006, 2-07, 10. 
[4] 
ΛΕΞΙΚΟ ΟΙΚΟΝΟΜΙΚΩΝ ΟΡΩΝ1, ΜΑΛΛΙΑΡΗΣ-ΠΑΙΔΕΙΑ Α.Ε., 2000. 
[5] 
Susanna Soglia, La terminologia come supporto alla traduzione: metodologie, 
applicazioni e prospettive future, S.S.L.M.I.T.- Università di Bologna, 2000, 548. 
[6] 
Kostas Valeontis, Elena Mantzari, The Linguistic Dimension of Terminology: 
Principles and Methods of Term Formation, 1st Athens International Conference on 
Translation and Interpretations Translation: Between Art and Social Science, 13-14 
October 2006. 
 
Benedetta Bertozzi – Franco Bertaccini 
SSLMIT Forlì -  Università di Bologna 
Corso della Repubblica, 136 
47100 Forlì (FC) Italy 
Tel.: ++ 39 0543 370521    
E-mail: bertaccini@sslmit.unibo.it 
http://terminologia.sslmit.unibo.it 
 
