SOURCE: http://www.eleto.gr/download/Conferences/8th%20Conference/Papers/8th_20-24_GavriilidouM-LabropoulouP-PiperidisS_Paper2_V03.pdf

ΕΛΕΤΟ – 8ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 10-12 Νοεμβρίου 2011 
 
296 
The META-SHARE Schema for the  
Description of Language Resources 
    
Μαρία Γαβριηλίδου, Πένυ Λαμπροπούλου, Στέλιος Πιπερίδης 
ABSTRACT 
This paper presents the metadata schema for the description of language resources and technologies 
(LRTs) currently under development for the needs of META-SHARE, an open distributed facility for the 
exchange and sharing of LRTs The description of LRTs is granular and abstractive, combining the 
taxonomy of LRTs with an inventory of a structured set of descriptive elements, of which only a minimal 
subset is obligatory. The schema also proposes recommended and optional elements, while it includes 
a set of relations for the linking of resources with other resources and with related material. The current 
paper presents the main principles of the metadata schema, focusing on the description of text corpora. 
 
Το σχήμα τεκμηρίωσης γλωσσικών πόρων META-SHARE 
 
Μαρία Γαβριηλίδου, Πένυ Λαμπροπούλου, Στέλιος Πιπερίδης 
ΠΕΡΙΛΗΨΗ 
Στην ανακοίνωση αυτή παρουσιάζεται ένα σχήμα μεταδεδομένων για την περιγραφή Γλωσσικών Πόρων 
και Τεχνολογιών (ΓΠΤ), το οποίο υποστηρίζει το META-SHARE, μία ανοιχτή κατανεμημένη υποδομή για 
την ανταλλαγή και διανομή ΓΠΤ. Η ανάπτυξη του σχήματος μεταδεδομένων, της υποδομής META-
SHARE καθώς και του ΜΕΤΑ-ΝΕΤ (http://www.meta-net.eu/meta/about-el) ενός δικτύου αριστείας 47 
οργανισμών από 31 κράτη αποτελούν μέρη του ερευνητικού έργου Τ4ΜΕ (http://t4me.dfki.de/).  
Το σχήμα μεταδεδομένων χρησιμοποιείται για την περιγραφή γλωσσικών πόρων και τεχνολογιών. Ένα 
υποσύνολο των στοιχείων περιγραφής αποτελούν κριτήρια αναζήτησης και εντοπισμού των πόρων, 
γεγονός που καθιστά το σχήμα βασικό συστατικό του μηχανισμού αναζήτησης που περιλαμβάνει η 
υποδομή. Το σχήμα απευθύνεται σε ειδικούς της Γλωσσικής Τεχνολογίας, δηλαδή σε ειδικό κοινό - 
ωστόσο, στοχεύει να είναι σαφές και εύχρηστο στην ευρύτερη επιστημονική κοινότητα. 
Η διαδικασία ανάπτυξης του σχήματος βασίστηκε σε μελέτη ανάλογων προηγούμενων δράσεων καθώς 
και σε μελέτη των αναγκών των χρηστών, όπως αυτές προέκυψαν από σχετικές συνεντεύξεις που 
διοργανώθηκαν στο πλαίσιο του έργου. Το σχήμα στοχεύει να είναι χρήσιμο τόσο σε δημιουργούς και 
παρόχους γλωσσικών πόρων και τεχνολογιών που επιθυμούν να περιγράψουν τους πόρους τους ώστε 
να είναι εντοπίσιμοι, όσο και στους χρήστες, που επιθυμούν να εντοπίσουν πόρους κατάλληλους για 
την έρευνά τους. Βάσει αυτού, οι αρχές σχεδίασης του σχήματος είναι  
- σαφής και σημιοσιολογικά διαφανής ορολογία, υποστηριζόμενη από ορισμούς και παραδείγματα,  
- εκφραστική ισχύς με χρήση στοιχείων κατάλληλων για την περιγραφή κάθε είδους γλωσσικών πόρων 
και τεχνολογιών αλλά και κάθε σταδίου ανάπτυξής τους,  
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 8ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 10-12 Νοεμβρίου 2011 
 
297 
- υιοθέτηση των σχετικών προτύπων, όπου υπάρχουν,  
- ευελιξία, με την παροχή δύο επιπέδων περιγραφής (ελάχιστης και πλήρους), 
- διαλειτουργικότητα με άλλα αποθετήρια πόρων και σχετικά εργαλεία,  
- δυνατότητα συγκομιδής των μεταδεδομένων από άλλα αποθετήρια, 
- επεκτασιμότητα, ώστε να είναι σε θέση να καλύπτει μελλοντικά νέους τύπους πόρων.   
Το σχήμα αποτελείται από στοιχεία που οργανώνονται σε συστατικά και συνδέονται μεταξύ τους με 
σχέσεις.  Τα στοιχεία κωδικοποιούν χαρακτηριστικά περιγραφής των γλωσσικών πόρων ενώ οι σχέσεις 
συνδέουν πόρους του αποθετηρίου μεταξύ τους (π.χ. πρωτογενή με επισημειωμένα δεδομένα, πόρους 
με τα εργαλεία επεξεργασίας τους) αλλά και με περιφερειακούς πόρους (όπως κείμενα τεκμηρίωσης, 
εγχειρίδια χρήσης του εργαλείου κ.λπ.) Το σύνολο των στοιχείων και των συστατικών που περιγράφουν 
έναν τύπο γλωσσικού πόρου αποτελεί το προφίλ αυτού του τύπου. Ορισμένα συστατικά περιλαμβάνουν 
πληροφορία που αφορά κάθε τύπο πόρου – για παράδειγμα, τα συστατικά που παρέχουν πληροφορία 
για την ταυτότητα, τη διαθεσιμότητα ενός πόρου κ.λπ. Συστατικά που περιλαμβάνουν πληροφορία π.χ. 
για το περιεχόμενο, την επισημείωση, τις χρήσεις ενός πόρου εξαρτώνται  από τον τύπο του πόρου. 
Το σχήμα προβλέπει δύο επίπεδα 
- 
το αρχικό επίπεδο, που περιλαμβάνει τα απαραίτητα βασικά χαρακτηριστικά για την 
περιγραφή ενός πόρου (από την πλευρά του παρόχου) και τον εντοπισμό του (από την 
πλευρά του χρήστη (βασικό σχήμα) 
- 
το δεύτερο επίπεδο, που παρέχει μεγαλύτερο βαθμό λεπτομέρειας και καλύπτει όλα τα στάδια 
παραγωγής και χρήσης ενός πόρου (πλήρες σχήμα). 
Τα δύο αυτά επίπεδα περιλαμβάνουν τέσσερεις τάξεις στοιχείων: το πρώτο περιλαμβάνει Υποχρεωτικά 
και Υποχρεωτικά-υπό-συνθήκη στοιχεία, ενώ το δεύτερο περιλαμβάνει Προτεινόμενα και Προαιρετικά 
στοιχεία.  
Στην ανακοίνωση αυτή παρουσιάζονται οι γενικές αρχές του σχήματος, τα στοιχεία που αφορούν όλους 
τους τύπους και αναλυτικά το υποσύνολο που αφορά τους πόρους γραπτής γλώσσας.  
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 8ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 10-12 Νοεμβρίου 2011 
 
298 
0   Introduction1 
The diverse and heterogeneous landscape of huge amounts of digital resources' collections 
(publications, datasets, multimedia files, processing tools, services and applications) has 
drastically transformed the requirements for their publication, archiving, discovery and long-
term maintenance. Digital repositories provide the infrastructure for describing and 
documenting, storing, preserving, and making this information publicly available in an open, 
user-friendly and trusted way. Repositories represent an evolution of the digital libraries 
paradigm towards open access, advanced search capabilities and large-scale distributed 
architectures. META-SHARE (www.meta-share.eu) is a network of repositories of language 
data, tools and related web services documented with high-quality metadata, aggregated 
in central inventories allowing for uniform search and access to resources. 
In the context of META-SHARE, the term metadata refers to descriptions of Language 
Resources (LRs), encompassing both data sets and tools / technologies / services used for 
their processing, also referred to as Language Resources and Technologies (LRTs). 
1   Design principles for the metadata model 
The metadata descriptions constitute the means by which LR users identify the resources 
they seek. Thus, the META-SHARE metadata model [Gavrilidou et al., 2010] forms an 
integral part of the search and retrieval mechanism, with a subset of its elements serving as 
the access points to the LRs catalogue. Although META-SHARE aims at an informed 
community (HLT specialists), this is by no means interpreted as a permission to create a 
complex schema; user-friendliness of the search interface should be supported by a well 
grounded schema. In this effort, we have built upon three main building blocks: 
(a) study of widespread metadata models in HLT and LR catalogue descriptions2.  
(b) user requirements, collected through a survey conducted in the framework of the project 
[Federmann et al., 2011]. 
 
 
                                                           
1  
This paper has been written in the framework of the project T4ME, funded by DG INFSO of the 
European Commission through the 7th Framework Program, Grant agreement no.: 249119. 
2  
The schemas taken into account include: Corpus Encoding Initiative (CES  XCES), Text Encoding 
Initiative (TEI), Open Language Archives Community (OLAC), ISLE MetaData Initiative (IMDI), 
European National Activities for Basic Language Resources (ENABLER), Basic Metadata 
Description (BAMDES), Dublin Core Metadata Initiative (DCMI), ELRA Catalogue, ELRA Universal 
Catalogue, LRE map, LDC catalogue, CLARIN metadata activities and the ISO 12620 – DCR. 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 8ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 10-12 Νοεμβρίου 2011 
 
299 
 
(c) the recommendations of the e-IRG report of ESFRI [e-IRG, 2009], in what concerns 
purpose of usage, aims and features. 
The basic design principles of the METASHARE model are: 
• 
semantic clarity: clear articulation of a term's meaning and its relations to other terms 
• 
expressiveness: successful description of any type of resource 
• 
flexibility: possibility for exhaustive but also for minimal descriptions 
• 
interoperability: mappings to widely used schemas 
• 
extensibility: allow for future extensions, as regards the coverage of more resource 
types as they become available. 
• 
harvestability: allow harvesting of the metadata (OAI-compatible). 
2   The metadata model essentials 
The mechanism we have adopted is the component-based mechanism proposed by the ISO 
DCR model, grouping together semantically coherent elements to form components and 
providing relations between them [Broeder et al., 2008]. More specifically, elements are 
used to encode specific descriptive features of the LRs, while relations are used to link 
together resources that are included in the META-SHARE repository (e.g. raw and 
annotated resources, a language resource and the tool that has been used to create it etc.), 
but also peripheral resources such as standards used, related documentation etc. 
The set of all the components and elements describing specific LR types and subtypes 
represent the profile of this type. Obviously, certain components include information 
common to all types of resources (e.g. identification, contact, licensing information etc.) and 
are, thus, used for all LRs, while others (e.g. components including information on the 
contents, annotation etc. of a resource) differ across types. Profiles for each type will be 
proposed as templates or guidelines for the description of the resource. In order to 
accommodate flexibility, the elements belong to two basic levels of description: 
• 
an initial level providing the basic elements for the description of a resource (minimal 
schema), and 
• 
a second level with a higher degree of granularity (maximal schema), providing 
detailed information on a resource and covering all stages of LR production and use. 
The minimal schema contains those elements considered indispensable for LR description 
(from the provider's perspective) and identification (from the consumer's perspective). It 
takes into account the views expressed in the user survey concerning which features are 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 8ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 10-12 Νοεμβρίου 2011 
 
300 
considered sufficient to give a sound "identity" to a resource. 
These two levels contain four classes of elements: the first level contains Mandatory (M) and 
Condition-dependent Mandatory (MC) elements (i.e. to be filled in when specific conditions 
are met), while the second level includes Recommended (R) and Optional (O) elements. 
3   The META-SHARE ontology 
META-SHARE takes a global view on resources, aiming at providing users not only with a 
catalogue of LRs (data and tools) but also with information that can be used to enhance their 
exploitation. For instance, research papers that document the production of a resource as 
well as standards and guidelines are informative for LR users and advisory for prospective 
LR producers. 
In the proposed META-SHARE ontology, a distinction is made between LR per se and all 
other related resources/entities, such as reference documents related to the resource 
(papers, reports, manuals etc.), persons / organizations involved in their creation and use 
(creators, distributors etc.), related projects and activities (funding projects, activities of 
usage etc.) and licenses (for the distribution of the LRs).  
4   Proposed LR taxonomy 
Central to the model is the LR taxonomy, which allows us to organize the resources in a 
structured way, taking into consideration the specificities of each type. The resourceType is 
the basic element according to which the LR types and subsequently the specific profiles are 
defined and take one of the following values: 
• 
corpus (including written/text, oral/spoken, multimodal/multimedia corpora) 
• 
lexical / conceptual resource (including terminological resources, word lists, 
semantic lexica, ontologies etc.) 
• 
language description (including grammars, language models, courseware etc.) 
• 
technology / tool / service (including basic processing tools, applications, web 
services etc. required for processing data resources) 
• 
evaluation package (for packages of datasets, tools and metrics used for evaluation 
purposes). 
5   Contents of the model 
The core of the model is the ResourceInfo component (Figure 1), which contains the 
information relevant for the description of a LR. It subsumes components and elements that 
combine together to provide this description. A broad distinction can be made between the 
"administrative" components, which are common to all LRs, and the components that are 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 8ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 10-12 Νοεμβρίου 2011 
 
301 
idiosyncratic to a specific LR type.  
 
Figure 1 
 
The set of components that are common to all LRs are the following: 
• 
the IdentificationInfo component includes all elements required to identify the resource, 
such as the resource full and short name, the persistent identifier (PID, to be assigned 
automatically by the system) etc. 
• 
the PersonInfo component provides information about the person that can be 
contacted for further information or access to the resource 
• 
all information relative to versioning and revisions of the resource is included in the 
VersionInfo component 
• 
crucial is the information on the legal issues related to the availability of the resource, 
specified by the DistributionInfo component, which provides a description of the terms 
of availability of the resource  
• 
the ValidationInfo component provides an indication on whether the resource has been 
validated and the relevant details  
• 
the ResourceCreationInfo and its dependent components group together information 
regarding the creation of a resource (creation dates, relevant project name etc.) 
• 
the UsageInfo component provides information on the intended use of a resource (i.e. 
the application(s) for which it was originally designed) and its actual use (i.e. 
applications for which it has already been used). 
• 
the MetadataInfo is responsible for all information relative to the metadata record 
creation, such as the catalogue from which the harvesting was made (in the case of 
harvested records) or the creation date and metadata creator (in case of records 
created from scratch using the metadata editor) etc. 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 8ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 10-12 Νοεμβρίου 2011 
 
302 
• 
the ResourceDocumentationInfo provides information on publications and documents 
describing the resource; basic documents (manuals, guidelines etc.) can be included in 
the META-SHARE repository and linked to the resource; 
• 
finally, the ContentInfo component describes the essence of the resource, specifying 
the resourceType and the mediaType elements, which give rise to specific 
components, distinct for each LR type, presented below. 
A further set of four components enjoy a "special" status in the sense that they can be 
attached to various components, namely PersonInfo, OrganizationInfo, CommunicationInfo 
and SizeInfo. For instance, sizeInfo can be used either for the size of a whole resource or, in 
combination with another component, to describe the size of parts of the resource (e.g. per 
domain, per language etc.). 
The ContentInfo component (Figure 2) groups together information on the contents of the 
resource. The elements included are: 
• 
description: free text describing the resource 
• 
resourceType having the values corpus, lexical/conceptual resource, language 
description, technology/tool/service, evaluation package 
• 
mediaType (used for data resources) 
• 
mediaTypeCompatibility (used for tools) 
 
Figure 2 
The following mediaType values are foreseen: 
• 
text: used for resources with only written medium (and modules of spoken and 
multimodal corpora), 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 8ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 10-12 Νοεμβρίου 2011 
 
303 
• 
audio (+ text): the audio feature set will be used for a whole resource or part of a 
resource that is recorded as an audio file; its transcripts will be described by the 
relevant Text feature set 
• 
image (+ text): the Image feature set is used for photographs, drawings etc., while 
the Text set will be reserved for its captions 
• 
video: moving image (+ text) (+ audio(+ text)): used for multimedia corpora, with 
Video for the moving image part, Audio for the dialogues, and Text referring to the 
transcripts of the dialogues and/or subtitles 
• 
sensorimotor: used for resources which contain data collected through the use of 
relevant equipment (gloves, helmets, body suits, laryngographs, etc.) and used to 
measure the activity of non-verbal modalities (gestures, facial expressions, body 
movements, articulatory activity, etc.) and their interaction with objects. 
A resource may consist of parts belonging to different types of media: for instance, a 
multimodal corpus includes a video part (moving image), an audio part (dialogues) and a 
text part (subtitles and/or transcription of the dialogues); a multimedia lexicon includes the 
text part, but also a video and/or an audio part; a sign language resource is also a good 
example for a resource with various media types. Similarly, tools can be applied to different 
media types resources: e.g. a tool can be used both for video and for audio files. 
Each one of the values of the resourceType and mediaType gives rise to a new component, 
respectively: 
• 
CorpusInfo, 
LexicalConceptualResourceInfo, 
LanguageDescriptionInfo, 
TechnologyToolServiceInfo and EvaluationPackageInfo include information specific 
to each LR type  
• 
TextInfo, AudioInfo, VideoInfo, ImageInfoand SensorimotorInfo provide information 
depending on the media type of a resource.  
The mandatory generic components and elements in the minimal schema are: 
• 
IdentificationInfo, including the name of the resource and persistent identifier 
• 
ContentInfo: all elements (description, resourceType, mediaType) are mandatory 
• 
DistributionInfo: availability must be filled in and depending on the type of 
availability, further elements are mandatory (license, types of restrictions if any etc.) 
• 
MetadataInfo: depending on the way the metadata record has been created 
(harvesting vs. manual creation), a different set of elements must be filled in 
 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 8ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 10-12 Νοεμβρίου 2011 
 
304 
• 
PersonInfo: at least an email must be provided for the contact person.  
In the next section, we provide a detailed view of the subset of the model for text corpora. 
6   Text corpora 
Text corpora are marked as such by the element resourceType=corpus, mediaType=text 
and their description must include a CorpusInfo and a TextInfo component (Figure 3). As 
already mentioned, alongside the text corpora, the textual parts of audio corpora 
(transcriptions) and video corpora (subtitles) are also included.  
 
Figure 3 
The type dependent information for text corpora is represented in the following components: 
• 
LingualityInfo provides information on the linguality type (mono-/bi-/multilingual 
corpora) and multilinguality type of text resources (parallel vs. comparable corpora)  
• 
LanguageInfo comprises information on the language(s) of a resource; the 
LanguageVarietyInfo component supplies information for data in regional language 
varieties, dialects, slang etc., if contained in the resource 
• 
SizeInfo provides information on the size of the whole resource but can also be 
attached to any other component that needs a specification of size  
• 
AnnotationInfo groups information on the annotation of text corpora, such as 
annotation types (lemmatization, PoS tagging, semantic annotation etc.), methods etc. 
The above four components are obligatory for all text corpora. A further set of components 
(FormatInfo, CharacterEncodingInfo, TextCorpusCreationInfo) are recommended, while 
optional components used to give information on the corpus are TimeCoverageInfo, 
GeographicCoverageInfo, DomainInfo and TextGenreInfo. 
 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 8ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 10-12 Νοεμβρίου 2011 
 
305 
7   Conclusions and future work 
The current version of the model contains the general model, the application of the model to 
text corpora (as presented in this paper), but also the LR types lexical conceptual resources, 
audio, video, image, and sensorimotor. Work is ongoing for the rest types, namely 
LanguageDescription, technologyToolService and evaluationPackage. In this process, it is 
expected that new components and elements will arise. A set of resources selected to 
represent all LR and media types is being described according to the model, in order to test 
its functionality; these resources with their descriptions will be uploaded in the prototype 
infrastructure for testing and exemplification purposes.  
8   References 
Broeder, D., T. Declerck, E. Hinrichs, S. Piperidis, L. Romary, N. Calzolari and P. 
Wittenburg, Foundation of a Component-based Flexible Registry for Language Resources 
and Technology, Proceedings of the 6th International Conference of Language Resources 
and Evaluation, 2008.  
e-IRG, e-IRG Report on Data Management,  http://www.eirg.eu/images/stories/publ/task 
_force_reports/dmtfjointreport.pdf, 2009. 
Federmann, C., B. Georgantopoulos, R. del Gratta, B.Magnini, D. Mavroeidis, S. Piperidis, 
M. Speranza, META-NET Deliverable D7.1.1 – METASHARE functional and technical 
specifications, 2011. 
Gavrilidou M., P. Labropoulou, E. Desipri, S. Piperidis, Preliminary Proposal for a Metadata 
Schema for the Description of Language Resources (LRs), Proceedings of the Workshop 
'Language Resource and Language Technology Standards', LREC 2010, Malta 2010. 
Gavrilidou, M., P. Labropoulou, S. Piperidis, M. Speranza, M. Monachini, V. Arranz, G. 
Francopoulo, META-NET Deliverable D7.2.1 - Specification of Metadata-Based Descriptions 
for Language Resources and Technologies, 2011. 
ISO 12620. Terminology and other language and content resources -- Specification of data 
categories and management of a Data Category Registry for language resources. 
http://www.isocat.org , 2009. 
 
ΕΛΕΤΟ – 8ο Συνέδριο «Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Ορολογία» 
Αθήνα, 10-12 Νοεμβρίου 2011 
 
306 
Αγγλο-ελληνικό γλωσσάριο όρων 
Αγγλικός όρος 
Ελληνικός όρος 
• component 
• συστατικό 
• element 
• στοιχείο 
• interoperability 
• διαλειτουργικότητα 
• language resource 
• γλωσσικός πόρος 
• lemmatization 
• λημματοποίηση 
• metadata harvesting 
• συγκομιδή μεταδεδομένων 
• PoS tagging, Part of Speech tagging 
• επισημείωση μέρους του λόγου 
• repository 
• αποθετήριο 
• sensorimotor 
• αισθησιοκινητικός 
• web service 
• διαδικτυακή υπηρεσία 
 
 
Μαρία Γαβριηλίδου 
Γλωσσολόγος,  
Αρτέμιδος 6 & Επιδαύρου, 151 25 Μαρούσι  
Ηλ.ταχ.: maria@ilsp.gr  
 
Πένυ Λαμπροπούλου 
Αρτέμιδος 6 & Επιδαύρου, 151 25 Μαρούσι  
Ηλ.ταχ.: penny@ilsp.athena-innovation.gr  
 
Στέλιος Πιπερίδης 
Ηλεκ/γος Μηχανικός ΕΜΠ 
Αρτέμιδος 6 & Επιδαύρου, 151 25 Μαρούσι  
Ηλ.ταχ.: spip@ilsp.gr  
 
